Document information
Short description:
This standard applies to all sources of hazardous energy and hazardous substances
Scope:
Group Companies will, as a minimum, follow the prevailing local regulations for all work requiring the isolation of sources of
energy. Where this ArcelorMittal standard is more demanding, then it will apply.
Business Owners:
Writer (prepared by):
Paulmier Robin
Haers Frank 
Creation date:
Review date:
Implementation Date:
10/12/2007
10/12/2007
24/12/2007
Reference Documents
Reference or date
Title
Validation
Validated by
Position
Validation date
PAULMIER ROBIN
Group Head Corporate H&S
13/10/2020
Approval
Approved by
Position
Approval date
ESCOBEDO ANA
Head Government Affairs Corporate
04/11/2020
AM_H&S_PR_002_01
 AM_Safety_ST_001.v0 - Isolation (FPS)
Health & Safety
ArcelorMittal
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_002
ArcelorMittal
AM_Safety_ST_001.v0 - Isolation (FPS)
Page 1 of 1
1.
Scope 
1.1. Group Companies will, as a minimum, follow the prevailing local regulations for all work 
requiring the isolation of sources of energy. Where this ArcelorMittal standard is more 
demanding, then it will apply.
1.2. This standard applies to all sources of hazardous energy and hazardous substances. 
2.
Definitions.
2.1. Hazardous energy: 
2.1.1. Electrical, Pneumatic, Hydraulic, Stored (springs, batteries), Potential (by virtue of 
position), Heat (hot water, steam), Radiation. 
2.2. Hazardous substances: 
2.2.1. Gases, Vapours, Liquids, Dusts with the potential to cause injury or illness, e.g. toxic,
corrosive, flammable. 
2.3. Competent person: 
2.3.1. Whenever a piece of equipment is to be isolated, there must be at least one person 
coordinating the Isolation Procedure. No person may coordinate the isolation for a 
piece of equipment unless s/he is competent to carry out the Isolation Procedure. 
Where one person is isolating, then this person must be competent. 
3.
Isolation Procedure:
3.1. All equipment must have written procedures for isolation developed from a risk assessment.
These procedures will set out how the equipment is to be made safe and kept safe. It will 
include, for example: decontamination; venting of stored energy; securing of rotors or fan 
blades; chocking of vehicles, disconnecting, blocking or bleeding of equipment, cables, 
pipes and vessels. It will also show the isolation points for lockout and test procedures as 
well as the procedure to remove another person’s lock/tag.
3.2. No isolation procedure is deemed as meeting the requirements of this standard that relies 
on shutting off emergency stops or control power; isolation of electrical sources shall be at 
the primary power source or through the use of a control reliable isolation device.
3.3. Before any work is begun on equipment, a competent person must first ensure that it is 
made safe in accordance with the Isolation Procedure. 
3.3.1. The competent person must first Lock out the energy source(s) and apply his/her 
Identification Tag. This will always be the first on and last off.
3.3.2. Where isolation involves only one person, that person must be competent.
3.3.3. Where there is a need for work to extend over multiple shifts or where there are two 
or more people involved in the work, each person must ensure the system is locked 
and apply his/her identification tag. There must be a system where the equipment 
cannot be restarted without the removal of each person’s lock/tag. 
3.4. After locking and tagging, the area must be cleared of personnel before a trial step to 
ensure that the equipment has been isolated. 
3.5. Personal locks/tags may never be removed except by the person to whom they belong, 
other than in the presence of and under the supervision of the Department or Area Manager
or his/her appointed nominee, and in accordance with a written procedure. 
---- End of Document ----