Document information
Short description:
Instructions for all work in a confined space.
Scope:
These instructions are applicable to all ArcelorMittal employees involved in work in a confined space.
Business Owners:
Writer (prepared by):
Paulmier Robin
Haers Frank 
Creation date:
Review date:
Implementation Date:
10/12/2007
05/07/2012
10/12/2007
Reference Documents
Reference or date
Title
Validation
Validated by
Position
Validation date
PAULMIER ROBIN
Group Head Corporate H&S
13/10/2020
Approval
Approved by
Position
Approval date
ESCOBEDO ANA
Head Government Affairs Corporate
05/11/2020
AM_H&S_PR_003_01
AM Safety ST 002 v2.2 - Confined 
Spaces.doc
Health & Safety
ArcelorMittal
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_003
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 002 v2.2 - Confined Spaces.doc
Page 1 of 4
1. 
Scope 
1.1.
Group Companies will,  as  a  minimum, follow the prevailing local regulations for all work in a
confined space. Where this ArcelorMittal standard is more demanding, then it will apply. 
This standard  does not apply to the underground part of the mine site. For that part of the 
mine specific regulations apply, according to the standards and law in the relevant countries.  
However, this standard does apply for the confined spaces at the surface part of the mine
1.2    When identifying confined spaces one must also check if the location is a Gas Hazard Area (AM 
standard 012), since both standards are interlinked (see flow chart below on single or 
combined use of the standards).
 
1.3. Confined space is in general (see categorizing workspace schema below):
an enclosed or partially enclosed space 
or 
spaces where movement is limited or physically restricted
and that: 
1.3.1.  Has been identified as such in a risk assessment and/or in a local regulatory process 
and 
1.3.2.  Is not intended or designed primarily as place of work; i.e. is not foreseen to be 
occupied in a permanent way and
1.3.3.  May have limited or restricted entry and exit (sometimes needing  a mechanical system ) 
and can have the following hazards:
1.3.3.1. An atmosphere which contains potentially harmful levels of contaminant or 
1.3.3.2. Not a safe level of oxygen e.g. following a nitrogen purge or 
1.3.3.3. Cause entrapment or engulfment.
start
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_003
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 002 v2.2 - Confined Spaces.doc
Page 2 of 4
1.4. Confined spaces include, but are not limited to: 
1.4.1 
Storage  tanks,  silos or areas of storage,  process vessels, boilers, pressure vessels, tank- 
like compartments that have only a manhole for entry, ceiling and floor spaces, spaces 
occupied by pipes and cables (considering galleries in particular). 
1.4.2.  Open-topped spaces such as pits, or grease traps, or excavations more than 1.5 metres 
deep. 
1.4.3.  Pipes, pumps, sewers, shafts, ducts, drains, tunnels, cellars,  spaces under 
equipments/installations, basements and similar structures. 
1.4.4. BOF (Best Oxygen Furnace) vessel, EAF (Electric Arc Furnace) vessel etc since entry / 
exit is not easy and / or gas may be present
1.5.  Following specific considerations have to be taken into account, but not limited to, 
when defining the conditions for access:
1.5.1. Having an atmosphere which contains potentially harmful levels of contaminant (dust, 
fume, mist, vapour, gas, or other substance in liquid or solid form) the presence of 
which may be harmful to health and safety.
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_003
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 002 v2.2 - Confined Spaces.doc
Page 3 of 4
1.5.2. Not having a safe level of oxygen, in particular due to presence of CO, CO2, Ar, N2 (e.g. 
following nitrogen purge).  Previous checking of atmosphere before entering is 
mandatory; this pre-entry check may require use of breathing equipment (to be 
checked on a case by case basis).
1.5.3 
Risk of combustion or explosion due to O2, CO, chemical organic products. (e.g. 
grease/oil + O2)
1.5.4 
Cause entrapment or engulfment due to movement of devices, movement of earths, 
demolitions or new constructions, working with pipes, cutting rocks in mines, …
1.5.5 
Extra risk due to vehicles working in this kind of spaces (e.g. in slag / tapping pits, 
casting….)
1.6.  Entry to confined space occurs when a perso n ’ s whole body, upper body or head is within the 
confined space. However, this is not intended to prevent a person from inserting their hand or 
arm while holding a test instrument or probe into a confined space as part of the evaluation 
procedure provided that this procedure is duly authorised and trained.
1.7.  Every opportunity must be taken to reduce the hazards associated with a confined space so as 
to mitigate the risk and eliminate this as a confined space. 
2. 
Identification 
Confined spaces must be identified and inventoried; signs  must be erected at or near by all the 
entries of all confined spaces.
2.1   Permit-required confined space
"Permit-required confined space (permit space)" means a confined space where one or more of 
following hazards is present;
-  The potential to contain a hazardous atmosphere (AM ST O12)
-  Not have a safe level of oxygen e.g. following a nitrogen purge
-
The potential for engulfing the entrant
-  A configuration that might cause an entrant to be trapped or asphyxiated by inwardly 
converging walls or by a floor that slopes downward and trappers to a smaller cross section
-  Contains any other recognized serious safety or health hazards ca n ’ t be eliminated and the 
confined space can’t be maintained in a condition safe to enter). 
In those cases the entry points must denote that a permit is required prior to entry.
2.2   Non-Permit-required confined space
“ Non-permit confined spac e ” means a confined space that does not contain or, with respect to 
atmospheric hazards, have the potential to contain any hazard capable of causing death or 
serious physical harm
The decision between both types has to be done locally, based on a risk assessment.
3. 
Permit System (permit-required confined space)
3.1.  Entry to a confined space must only be allowed after  a complete Risk Assessment and after 
proper isolation conditions and mitigation actions have been put in place and  a written 
approval, in the form of a permit, has been issued by a competent person (i.e. the one  
responsible to coordinate the tasks to be done in this confined space and has participated in 
the Risk Assessment) who is authorised to issue such permits.
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_003
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 002 v2.2 - Confined Spaces.doc
Page 4 of 4
3.2. The permitting process must include the following elements: 
  
A risk assessment, including the need for a competent person to assess such things as oxygen 
levels, contaminants, temperature extremes, and concentrations of flammable substances; 
isolation procedures for contaminants and other energy sources; need for ventilation, the 
requirement for breathing apparatus; the sign-in and sign-out of all persons entering the 
confined  space;  internal lighting and  signaling ; emergency lights, auxiliary lights; atmospheric 
protection conditions;  display of the permit; communication equipment; safety specification of 
equipment to be taken into the confined space; barricading; rescue plan and equipment; 
standby person; and, a completion of work procedure. The risk assessment may require that  
people working in confined spaces wear a safety harness, connected with a cable or cord 
extending outside the confined space, allowing easy evacuation in case of emergency
4. 
Other Requirements 
4.1.  All persons required to work in a permit required confined space, or to act as a standby person, 
must be trained and competent, both in technical and health conditions.
4.2.  Specific safe work procedures must be developed for work activities that are more hazardous  
when carried out in a confined space than elsewhere. These activities would include hot work 
(cutting and welding), chemical cleaning, steam cleaning, and abrasive blasting.  According 
these conditions specific collective and PPE’s protections must be defined.
4.3.
The standby person will have no other duties and is to be positioned outside the confined
space entry point at all times while personnel are within the space. 
---- End of Document ----