Document information
Short description:
Instructions for all work in and around rail and rail equipment.   
Scope:
These instructions are applicable to all ArcelorMittal employees involved in all work in and around rail and rail equipment.  
Business Owners:
Writer (prepared by):
Paulmier Robin
Haers Frank 
Creation date:
Review date:
Implementation Date:
20/12/2007
08/05/2012
20/12/2007
Reference Documents
Reference or date
Title
Validation
Validated by
Position
Validation date
PAULMIER ROBIN
Group Head Corporate H&S
13/10/2020
Approval
Approved by
Position
Approval date
ESCOBEDO ANA
Head Government Affairs Corporate
05/11/2020
AM_H&S_PR_005_01
AM Safety ST 004 v2 Rail Safety.doc
Health & Safety
ArcelorMittal
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_005
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 004 v2 Rail Safety.doc
Page 1 of 3
1. Scope
1.1. Group Companies will, as a minimum, follow the prevailing local regulations for all work in and 
around rail and rail equipment. Where this AM standard is more demanding, then it will apply.
1.2. This standard applies to all work on or near railway equipment and lines. 
2. Operations
2.1.A documented risk assessment (HIRA) must be carried out to identify all hazards and risks 
associated with rail operations and rolling stock taking, particularly linked to and not limited to:
-
maximum safe speeds
-
shunting operations
-
coupling and uncoupling operations
-
rolling stock parking
-
loading and unloading 
(especially dangerous goods as hot liquid substances, scrap, …)
-
access into or from vehicles (locomotive and wagons)
-
entering buildings
-
close clearance
-
work in/at rail tracks
-
……………………….etc.
On these topics, clear safety rules must be written.
2.2.All people involved in the operation of rail operations and rolling stock must be trained competent.
Only authorized person are allowed to ride on cars/wagons or locomotives, or to perform rail 
operations. All tasks, responsibilities and trainings must be properly documented. 
2.3.The risk assessment must also identify any close clearances around the track. These must be 
identified and post signaled.
 
2.4.Adequate clearance (structure gauge, also called the minimum clearance outline), either vertical 
or horizontal, is necessary to ensure safe rail operations and is an integral part of any rail system 
engineering. Where adequate clearance is not given, we talk about close clearance.
2.5.There must be a procedure for inspections to establish that equipment is in safe working order 
before operating. This inspection must encompass all equipment highlighted in a risk assessment, 
especially all safety devices. Records must be kept (rails, rail crossings, signaling and rolling stock)
and detected anomalies removed quickly in a formalized system.
2.6.Locomotives must be fitted with head lights and audible devices such as a train horn. The audible 
device must be sounded prior to moving the locomotive and when entering a building, crossing 
roads and pedestrian walkways. Head lights must be kept on while the locomotive is moving. 
2.7.Prior to entering a building, brakes must be tested, warning must be given and speed must be 
adapted.
2.8. Procedures for getting on and off trains must include the use of engineered sill steps, handles and 
ladders/steps placed so to prevent injury to legs, feet and hands. It is never permissible to mount, 
dismount, or cross over moving equipment. When not practical a HIRA must be conducted to define
the best possible practice. Getting on and getting off rail equipment, three-point contact must be 
utilized at all times.
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_005
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 004 v2 Rail Safety.doc
Page 2 of 3
2.9.Emergency response plans must integrate rail issues
2.10.All terminal tracks must have appropriate designed buffer stops, arresting devices or end impact 
walls.
2.11.Wedges must be used to prevent parked rolling stock against moving
3. Work on rail and tracks
3.1. Every one that is required to work on or within 3 meters / 10 feet of a railway track must be 
protected from rail movements by track isolation using derail or switch locks. This must be 
described in a procedure.
3.2. For any work on or within 3 meters/10 feet (distance to the nearest head of a rail) of a railway 
track, a written permission of the designee of rail operations, based on a HIRA and associated 
mitigation plan, is needed before the work starts.
3.3. Prior to beginning work where railroad track isolation is necessary, the supervisor, or designee,
must notify those responsible for rail operations to alert them of the work to be performed. 
Records must be written and kept.
3.4. People working on these areas must wear adequate PPE based of the HIRA.
3.5. When an approved safety barrier is installed during works, everyone must stay more than 1,50 
meters (5 feet) (distance to the nearest head of a rail) from a railway track. If a safety barrier is 
being used as part of the safe system of work, one must not lean against it or rest tools or 
equipment against it.
3.6. When isolation of the track is not practical possible, Train Approaching Warning (TAW) may be used
as track protection. A HIRA must be performed to define the specific conditions when TAW is 
authorized (e.g. production can’t be stopped or slowed down, transport of hot metal must go on 
between blast furnace and the steel shop, emergency reasons,..)  and it must include the following
conditions;
•
All works on rail tracks need written permission of the designee of rail operations. 
•
Person has been qualified as a watchman/lookout or stand-by person by successfully completing
this training and has knowledge of the area’s physical characteristics and train operations.
•
Roadway/ track workers are performing routine inspections or minor repairs that do not affect 
the safe movement of trains. 
•
Track must be free of any equipment. 
•
The watchman/lookout or stand-by person is able to see the approach of a train, engine, or 
other railroad equipment approaching at maximum speed authorized and all persons present 
(watchman and workers) can move to and be in predetermined place of safety not less than 15 
seconds before the train, engine, or other railroad equipment would arrive.
•
This may require, depending on rail geometry, limiting the train, engine, … speed, 
accompanied by proper information to the drivers and proper signaling of local maximum speed
•
Provide sufficient visual and acoustic warnings to employees that a train or other moving 
equipment is approaching 
•
Employees must commit to react without any delay to all signals given by the watchman / 
lookout or stand-by person.
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_005
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 004 v2 Rail Safety.doc
Page 3 of 3
4. Pedestrians and vehicles
4.1. Rolling stock must have right of way at all times. Vehicles must come to a complete stop prior to 
crossing any rail track. Appropriate induction training and signage, notably at the entrances of the 
plant, must be available to ensure that all employees, contractors and visitors are aware of this 
rule.
4.2. A plan/map for rail traffic (with all the tracks for traffic, parking and marshalling, road and 
pedestrian ways crossings and line equipments) must be defined and signed.
4.3. Only approved crossings may be used. These designated crossings must be signaled, adequately 
illuminated and clear of obstacles which could decrease visibility of the tracks.
4.4. When crossing any track (unless the track is isolated); one must have a min. distance of 3 meter 
(10 feet) from standing locomotives, cars/wagons and bumpers or other fixed objects on the track.
4.5. Trespassing on railway tracks is prohibited. During railroad operations no person is allowed on 
railroad tracks.
4.6. No person or vehicle is allowed in close clearance areas unless the track is isolated. 
“Close-clearance” and in many cases “no-clearance” are those situations where clearance cause a 
safety concern or whenever there is little or no room for a person to pass between the rail car and 
the obstruction safely. Any access to close clearance areas can only be made using a documented 
procedure developed from a risk assessment and people entering these close clearances must be 
authorized. 
---- End of Document ----