Document information
Short description:
Instructions for all Shop floor audits and layered evaluations.   
Scope:
These instructions are applicable to all leaders from front line and to the highest level in the organization.   
Business Owners:
Writer (prepared by):
Paulmier Robin
Masciulli-antoine Martine
Creation date:
Review date:
Implementation Date:
18/12/2007
12/05/2014
08/12/2007
Reference Documents
Reference or date
Title
Validation
Validated by
Position
Validation date
PAULMIER ROBIN
Group Head Corporate H&S
13/10/2020
Approval
Approved by
Position
Approval date
ESCOBEDO ANA
Head Government Affairs Corporate
05/11/2020
AM_H&S_PR_006_01
AM Safety ST 005 v3 Shop Floor 
Audits.doc
Health & Safety
ArcelorMittal
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_006
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 005 v3 Shop Floor Audits.doc
Page 1 of 2
1.
Scope and definitions
1.1. This standard applies to all leaders from front line and to the highest level in the organization.
1.2. Shop floor audits and layered evaluations are face-to-face discussions between people carrying out 
work on the shop floor and leaders in order to increase commitment to safer ways of working. They 
have the following objectives:
1.2.1.
To review work practices;
1.2.2.
To reinforce existing standards;
1.2.3.
To identify improvement opportunities;
1.2.4.
To provide positive feedback on safe work; and 
1.2.5.
To correct activities that are unsafe.
1.3. Shop floor audits can be carried out by leaders on an individual basis. Layered evaluations require 
that there is a minimum of two people. This provides the opportunity for better alignment of 
standards as well as the ability to provide feedback to each other.
1.3.1.
Layers are made up of people at different levels of the line management team;
1.3.2.
There must be a minimum of two people within the line of responsibility for the employees 
being evaluated;
1.3.3.
Sequential supervisory levels are not mandatory;
1.3.4.
Front line managers should be involved in the layered evaluations;
1.3.5.
Corporate Senior Management (GMB and MC) can make up a layer with any line manager in 
their area of responsibility.
1.3.6.
Process could include other workplace stakeholders as determined by the site.
2.
Minimum requirements
Managers should spend minimum 20% of their working time on the shop floor having face to face 
contacts with their teams and dealing with H&S issues including shop floors audits and layered 
evaluations.
Shop Floor Audits and Layered Evaluations must be organized to cover the full concerned perimeter and 
all the team members.
2.1. Frequency of audit 
Who
Minimum frequency
GMB
All exempts in all support functions (corporate and 
business unit level)
Exempts in non-operational support functions like 
administration, finance, … (site level)
1 evaluation / audit / month
(at least 50% must be layered)
Exempts in hierarchical functions (from site CEO down)
Exempts in operational support functions (site level)
1 evaluation / audit / week
(at least 50% must be layered)
Non exempts in hierarchical functions 
(superintendent, Supervisor)
Each worker in their team should be 
audited through shop floor audit at 
minimum twice per year
3.
Audit documentation
3.1. A summary of material observations and discussions during the process must be documented. This 
summary must include:
3.1.1.
The at-risk issues categorized (typical categories are Procedures, Positions, Ergonomics, 
Personal Protective Equipment PPE, Tools and Equipment and Orderliness) and ranked 
according to the potential for injury.
3.1.2.
A list of the observed and discussed commendable actions.
3.1.3.
Material health and safety action items to be followed up as a result of the activities. These 
will list responsible person and timing.
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_006
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 005 v3 Shop Floor Audits.doc
Page 2 of 2
4.
Process to be followed
4.1. Activity must be conducted in an open, positive and personal manner;
4.2. The focus of the process must be on work activity and behavior, not on conditions;
4.3. Discussions should be two-way and focus on only health and safety matters. Any other matters 
should be deferred to the conclusion of the evaluation;
4.4. When observing unsafe practices, it is necessary to obtain a personal commitment from employees 
to work safely in the future, and;
4.5. In the event of observation of a major health and safety infraction, the process must be stopped and 
the issue dealt with in the appropriate manner.
4.6. The trend in observations and action plans must be followed up to ensure systematic issues are 
eliminated.
---- End of Document ---