Document information
Short description:
 Instructions for all follow the prevailing local regulations for the establishment of an incident investigation process.  
Scope:
Group Companies will, as a minimum, follow the prevailing local regulations for the establishment of an incident
investigation process. Where this AM standard is more demanding, then it will apply.
Business Owners:
Writer (prepared by):
Paulmier Robin
Haers Frank 
Creation date:
Review date:
Implementation Date:
24/09/2008
26/07/2012
24/09/2008
Reference Documents
Reference or date
Title
Validation
Validated by
Position
Validation date
PAULMIER ROBIN
Group Head Corporate H&S
13/10/2020
Approval
Approved by
Position
Approval date
ESCOBEDO ANA
Head Government Affairs Corporate
05/11/2020
AM_H&S_PR_011_01
AM Safety ST 011 v1 - Incident 
Investigation.doc
Health & Safety
ArcelorMittal
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_011
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 011 v1 - Incident Investigation.doc
Page 1 of 2
1. Scope
1.1. Group Companies will,  as  a  minimum, follow the prevailing local regulations for the establishment of 
an incident investigation process. Where this AM standard is more demanding, then it will apply.
2. Definitions
2.1. Incident .  An incident is an unplanned event that may or may not result in an injury or damage. 
Incidents include near misses. 
2.2. Incident Investigation Process . The incident investigation process involves the following four 
interrelated activities with the goal to prevent recurrence of the incident: collect incident data, 
describe incident sequence, determine causal factors, and develop preventive and corrective actions.
2.2.1. Collect Incident Data . The first step in the investigative process is the collection of work- 
related data pertaining to the relevant events and circumstances involved in the incident. This 
may include information on personnel, tasks, equipment and environmental conditions. 
2.2.2. Describe Incident Sequence . The incident sequence is described or re-created by arranging 
the relevant incident events and circumstances into a time-based sequence.
2.2.3. Determine Causal Factors . Within the incident sequence of events and circumstances are 
unsafe conditions and actions (or decisions) that are considered to be causal factors and 
ultimately led to the unplanned event. 
2.2.3.1. Root Cause Analysis/Critical Decision Analysis . Root cause analysis is a 
systematic method to identify  “ root cause s ” , i.e., those causes where solutions can 
be applied to prevent or reduce the occurrence of a problem. This analysis involves a 
cause and effect charting technique using elements of the incident sequence. Critical 
decision analysis compliments the root cause analysis by providing a way to better 
understand the motivations and reasons underlying the causal decisions (and actions) 
that led to the incident. 
2.2.4. Develop Preventive and Corrective Actions . The causal factors are used to identify 
work- related problems and  deficiencies and provide the bases for effective preventive and 
corrective actions. Follow-up will be required to ensure the effectiveness of these actions.
3. Incident Investigation
3.1. The organization shall establish, implement, and maintain an incident investigation process to 
investigate all work-related incidents and prevent their recurrence.
3.2. The organization shall use the root cause analysis and critical decision analysis methods, or 
equivalent analyses, as part of the incident investigation activity to determine causal factors. As a 
minimum, these analyses must be formally documented for investigations involving:
3.2.1. W ork related incidents which have resulted in one or more fatalities or where one or more 
people  suffered life threatening injuries in an ArcelorMittal plant (includes employees, 
contractors, customers, visitors etc.) 
3.2.2. S ignificant  incidents that could have caused a fatality in an ArcelorMittal plant (includes 
employee, contractors, customers, visitors etc.)
3.2.3. Incidents that result in a lost time injury. 
3.3. The incident investigation process and its application shall be incorporated into other organizational 
processes, including but not limited to:
3.3.1. Work planning;
3.3.2. Design;
3.3.3. Procurement.
3.4. The organization shall ensure:
3.4.1. employees conducting incident investigations are adequately trained in the incident 
investigation process, including the root cause analysis and critical decision analysis methods 
or their equivalencies;
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_011
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 011 v1 - Incident Investigation.doc
Page 2 of 2
3.4.2. employees participating in an incident investigation are provided with adequate time and 
resources to participate effectively in the incident investigation process; and, 
3.4.3. Employees are informed and consulted on the findings of an incident investigation associated 
with their work or workplace, as required.
3.5. The organization shall:
3.5.1. document the findings of the incident investigations, including the relevant incident data, the 
incident sequence, the root causal factors, and the preventive and corrective actions; and,
3.5.2.maintain records of the incident investigations to provide evidence of the effective application 
and closure of the incident investigation process
3.6. If the investigation  comes to the conclusion that human factor has contributed to the incident 
happening, it is necessary to investigate why this occurred. In order to do this in a systematic 
way the approach as described in attachment 3 has to be followed strictly.
3.7. The organization should continually improve the effectiveness of the incident investigation process. 
A senior management review shall include an assessment of opportunities for continual improvement 
based on sections 3.1 to 3.6.
Attachments:
AM Safety ST 011 - A1 - Guidance Doc - AM Global Incident Investigation
AM Safety ST 011 - A2 - Guidance Doc for RCA-CDA as part of AM Global Incident Investigation
AM Safety ST 011 - A3 - Investigation of human factor
---- End of Document ----