 
1
AM Safety ST 001 v1 - Guidelines FPS Isolation - English 
October 2011 
 
Guideline for 
 
 Implementation of  
 
 
 
 
AM  
 
Safety ST001 - 
Isolation
 
2
Guideline for implementation of AM Safety ST001 - Isolation 
 
Table of contents  
1 
Purpose.................................................................................................................................. 3 
2 
Scope/related requirements ................................................................................................. 3 
3 
General Approach to positive lock out.................................................................................. 4 
4 
Definitions ............................................................................................................................. 5 
5 
Basics & pre requisites .......................................................................................................... 8 
5.1 
Organization: roles & responsibilities................................................................... 8 
5.2 
Assessment to identify & to inventory all types of energy................................ 9 
5.3 
List / inventory all isolation points......................................................................... 9 
5.4 
Assessment to build a respective isolation work instruction............................ 9 
5.5 
A permit to work procedure and lock out permit .............................................. 10 
6 
Training to achieve competency on isolation process........................................................ 11 
6.1 
Employee Training................................................................................................ 11 
6.2 
Employee Retraining ............................................................................................ 11 
7 
Planning and preparation of equipment............................................................................. 12 
8 
Emergency procedures........................................................................................................ 13 
9 
Isolation methods & their use............................................................................................. 14 
9.1 
Lock Out ................................................................................................................. 14 
9.2 
Tag out.................................................................................................................... 14 
9.3 
Failures................................................................................................................... 14 
9.4 
Controlling changes.............................................................................................. 14 
9.5 
Exception................................................................................................................ 15 
10 
Isolation process.................................................................................................................. 17 
10.1 Securing isolations................................................................................................ 17 
10.2 Detailed Isolation Procedure Steps (example)................................................. 17 
11 
Audits/Evaluation and Records ........................................................................................... 24 
11.1 Periodic Program Evaluation/ Audits ................................................................. 24 
11.2 Record Keeping..................................................................................................... 24 
11.3 Example Program Evaluation ............................................................................. 24 
12 
Design, engineering and new, revamped or modified equipment..................................... 25 
13 
Computer Support for the Isolation Process....................................................................... 26 
14 
Practical guidance’s............................................................................................................. 27 
14.1 Shift or personnel changes.................................................................................. 27 
14.2 One person, One lock .......................................................................................... 27 
14.3 One lock, One key ................................................................................................ 27 
14.4 Multiple energy sources....................................................................................... 28 
14.5 Locks....................................................................................................................... 28 
14.6 Long term lockout ................................................................................................. 31 
14.7 Permanent Lockout............................................................................................... 31 
14.8 Out of service tag.................................................................................................. 31 
14.9 Removal of lockout by another person.............................................................. 31 
14.10 Complex group process (e.g. shared lockout) ................................................. 32 
14.11 Example; Positive Lockout of fluids ................................................................... 33 
14.12 Example; High Voltage Procedures................................................................... 34 
15 
References........................................................................................................................... 36
 
3
 
1 Purpose 
 
The purpose of the isolation guidelines is to comply with the standard AM Safety ST001 - 
Isolation: 
 
• 
to provide work instructions to establish and operate a system for the safe removal and 
isolation of hazardous energy sources (electrical, mechanical, stored,..) whenever any 
work is performed on an installation / equipment or systems, to prevent accidents and 
injury through accidental start-up or re - energization.  
• 
to provide good practices which today are available within the AM group 
• 
these Isolation guidelines will help sites to implement the FPS of isolation and help them 
to reach level 3 or more on the FPA in the near future. These guidelines can be used as 
basis for a review of the site isolation procedure. 
 
Training of the guidelines: 
 
• 
An associated training will be available on these guidelines including good practices 
which are available today within the AM group. 
2 Scope/related requirements 
 
The FPS on Isolation is mandatory and is to be completely implemented and executed in all 
premises of ArcelorMittal. 
 
Tag Out is temporarily tolerated as a form of transition to lockout, an action plan must be 
developed to guide this transformation in the shortest possible delay. 
 
Besides the isolation standard and the respective Golden Rule and Isolation Work Instructions 
are mandatory as well due to legal requirements: 
 
OSHA directive US 1910.147; 
You must have a lockout program if any of your employees perform maintenance work on 
installation or equipment that either: 
• exposes them to injury if the equipment were to accidentally be started, or 
• exposes them to injury if an unexpected release of hazardous energy were to occur, such as a 
blast of steam, corrosive chemical, or an electrical arc flash. 
 
EU directive 89/655; 
Employers must establish a program and utilize procedures for affixing appropriate lockout 
devices or tag-out devices to energy isolating devices, and to otherwise disable machines or 
equipment to prevent unexpected energizing, start up or release of stored energy in order to 
prevent injury to employees. 
The employer must take appropriate measures to reduce risks to a minimum. All work equipment 
must have clearly identifiable means to isolate it from all its energy sources. Maintenance work 
should take place when the equipment is shut down and maintenance workers must be able to 
achieve all necessary equipment under constant conditions of security. 
 
Not in the scope of the Lockout standard nor this guideline: 
- Normal operating procedures those are “routine, repetitive, and integral to the use of the 
equipment”. For instance, lockout is not required each time material is added to a baler. 
Guards or interlocks should adequately protect the employees during such operations. 
- Machine guards and safety interlocks: those are to protect employees during normal 
operation. Lockout on the contrary is intended to protect employees during maintenance and 
jam clearing when safety guards often have to be removed or be overridden. If a safety guard 
is being removed or overridden from a piece of equipment, it is a powerful clue that lockout 
may be necessary (do HIRA)!
 
4
3 General Approach to positive lock out 
 
We must install the highest level of security, the positive lockout = is installing a locking 
device which physically blocks an energy isolation device and which is identifiable.  
 
 
 
 
 
• Identify and understand the differences that can facilitate the compliance with this FPS (e.g. 
having lockable isolation devices by construction – work under total rather then partial 
isolation) 
• Identify the possible consequences of the compliance (e.g. lengthen the stoppage for 
maintenance – equip the isolation devices with lockable system) 
LOCKS 
TAGS 
START
Isolation Work 
Instructions
Amount of used isolation points
 
5
4 Definitions 
 
Isolation 
• Taking a piece of equipment or installation and temporarily or permanently placing it into a 
condition (or state) of zero power supply (and Zero Energy State) and of zero dangerous 
substance. 
• Also making sure that the equipment or installation can not move or cycle due to stored or 
potential energy. 
 
Isolation procedure 
An isolation procedure is a written document describing a set of predetermined steps that has to 
be followed to keep an installation and/or equipment and its components from being energized or 
being set in motion or to prevent the release of stored energy, and avoid the release of hazardous 
substances in order to protect the safety of persons during services and/or maintenance and/or 
total productive maintenance tasks and/or tasks in degraded situations and/or inspections, which 
take place during normal production operations. 
 
Energy sources 
Any one or combination of (but not limited to) Electrical, Pneumatic, Hydraulic, Stored energy 
(accumulators, pressure vessels, batteries, springs, capacitors), Potential energy by virtue of 
position that needs to be support, heat such a hot water or steam and radiation (for example from 
reheating furnaces), hazardous substances, gases, … .  
 
Listed next are short definitions of the types of energy sources. 
- Chemical Energy: Power created by the reaction between two or more substances e.g. 
petroleum, natural gas, and propane.    
- Electrical energy: A form of power created by the movement of electrons. Electrical energy, or 
electricity, can cause electric shock. 
- Hydraulic energy: Power created by the compressive force or movement of a liquid in a 
confined area e.g. Machines that lift objects often use hydraulic energy. 
- Mechanical energy: A combination of kinetic and potential energy resulting from the force of 
gravity, stored or the movement or release of a machine component e.g. such as a spring, 
clamp, wheel, counterweight, table (falling or moving), …..etc. 
- Pneumatic energy: Power created by the compressive force or movement of air or gas in a 
confined area e.g. assembly tools often use pneumatic energy to force parts together. 
- Potential energy: Power that is stored or suppressed or that exists because of its position and 
the effects of gravity e.g. machines that have large components that rise and lower, such as a 
press, contain potential energy that becomes kinetic energy when it is released. Stored energy 
are water, air, fluids, steam or another gas, liquid or vapour, … etc. 
- Thermal energy: Power created by or in the form of heat. Heat can be retained in machine 
parts and cause burns. 
- Radiation: Refers to any radiation process in which chemical changes can damage biological 
tissues and structural materials e.g. radiation sources. 
- Kinetic Energy/ Stored Energy: is the extra energy which it possesses due to its motion. It is 
defined as the work needed to accelerate a body of a given mass from rest to its current 
velocity. 
- Hazardous substances are any toxic, corrosive or flammable material, which has the potential 
to cause injury or illness, e.g. gases, vapours, steam, liquids and dust. 
 
Energy isolating device (isolation point or switching item) 
A device (included are blank flanges and bolted slip blinds) that physically prevents the 
transmission or release of energy, including but not limited to the following: a manually operated 
electrical circuit breaker; a disconnect switch; a manually operated switch by which the 
conductors of a circuit can be disconnected from all underground supply conductors, and, in 
addition no pole can be operated independently; a line valve; a block; and any similar device 
used to block or isolate energy to which either a lock or key or combination type can be attached 
to avoid unwanted movement of the switching element.
 
6
Push buttons, selector switches and other control circuit type of devices are not energy isolating 
devices, unless they are safety devices designed to securely drop out energy source power. 
 
 
Positive lockout 
Is installing a lockout device which physically blocks an energy isolation device and which is 
identifiable. 
 
Interlock system 
Is a system with devices, especially one operated electromechanically, used in a logic circuit or 
electrical safety system to prevent an activity being initiated unless preceded by certain events 
(e.g. safety gate systems; a safety device that disables or prevents a machine start-up if a guard 
or door remains open.) This is NOT the same as a lock-out! 
 
Tag out device 
A prominent warning device, such as a tag and a means of substantial attachment, which can be 
securely fastened to an energy isolating device in accordance with an established procedure, to 
indicate that the energy isolating device and the equipment being controlled will not be operated 
until the tag out device is removed. Tags must forbid hazardous actions at the energy isolating 
device, and be treated/respected as though it were a physical lock. 
 
Energy isolation verification 
Verification performed to ensure that the equipment has been isolated, e.g by operating the 
machine start-up controls, control lamps and displays taking measurements at bleed points, 
taking measurements to check the absence of power in the case of work involving electrical 
hazards  
 
Zero potential energy 
This means that the equipment/machine/device/system or any part of it has zero potential energy 
stored within it after isolation. 
 
Live equipment 
Live equipment is considered machines or equipment not disconnected or isolated from the main 
energy source/s. 
 
Capable of being locked out 
An energy isolating device is capable of being locked out if it has a hasp or other means of 
attachment to which or through which a lock can be affixed, or it has a locking mechanism built 
into it. Other energy isolating devices are capable of being locked out if lockout can be achieved 
without the need to dismantle, rebuild, or replace the energy isolating device or permanently alter 
its energy control capability. 
 
HIRA 
Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment 
 
Isolation Inventory (II) 
Is a general plant inventory of all equipment on a site / in a department which records all isolation 
points of a machine or process which will or can be used during isolation depending on the tasks 
to perform.  These inventories are the basis of a task Isolation Work Instruction (IWI). 
 
Isolation Work Instruction (IWI) 
Is a document which describes how an installation for a specific job must be isolated from his 
energy sources. Including; energy sources, lockout points, locations, methods, verifications, 
checks, emergency control information, lockout application steps and release steps. 
 
Affected employee (all members of the work execution team) 
An employee whose job requires him/her to operate or use a machine or equipment on which 
servicing or maintenance is being performed under isolation, or whose job requires him/her to 
work in an area in which such servicing or maintenance is being performed (cleaners, crane 
driver, forklift driver,….).
 
7
 
Individual Isolation operator (‘own isolation’) 
Is a person who only locks out energy sources for his own safety (‘own isolation’) and is declared 
competent to do so on selective equipment. Must undergo training and be assessed as 
competent; e.g.  mobile equipment isolation, routine operational tasks, etc  
 
 
 
Individual lock identification label 
Is a label with all necessary information of the owner of the individual lock and attached to the 
lock when performing the lock out. 
 
General Isolation operator (authorized person) 
A person who locks out machines or equipment in order to perform servicing or maintenance on 
that machine or equipment. One familiar with the equipment and hazards involved who 
possesses the skills and techniques necessary to execute a safe isolation. Must undergo training 
and be assessed as competent. 
 
General lock identification label 
Is a label that is used with relevant information during a general lockout by a general isolation 
operator e.g. in combination with department locks or service locks. 
 
 
Isolation coordinator 
He coordinates and checks follow-up activities between all parties during safety execution phase, 
mostly during maintenance days. This role could be dispatched through to several persons if 
business does not want to put a dedicated person in place for this activity. Must undergo training 
and be assessed as competent. Isolation coordinator normally doesn’t perform the lock out. 
 
Maintenance Department/Division Safety Manager/Supervisor 
He is responsible for maintenance and safety for his perimeter. He has to define the 
risks/protective actions linked to the functional locations of the installation tree. He has to do the 
safety studies for proper isolation in each area. He is responsible to see that isolation inventories 
and task IWI’s are in place and followed. 
 
Work control system 
All documents, procedures and installation schemes related with the lock out of equipment.
 
8
Workflow authorized isolation 
 
5 Basics & pre requisites 
 
Major basics & prerequisites for an appropriate isolation process are:  
• A well defined organization with clearly defined roles and responsibilities  
• A detailed Assessment  
- 
to identify and to inventory all types of energy  
- 
to inventory all isolations points  
- 
to carry out a respective isolation work instruction 
• A work permit procedure  
• Training to achieve competency on isolation process for all persons involved  
 
Lockout pre requirements 
 
• Consideration must be given to wear the correct PPE while lockout is being done, e.g. when 
electrical switchgear must be switched for lockout purposes. 
• Plants must issue specific instructions regarding the required PPE when switching and lockout 
of specific equipment is performed. This is to be spelled out in the isolation work instruction 
(IWI) of each plant. 
 
5.1 
Organization: roles & responsibilities 
 
Roles such as ‘Affected employee’, ‘Individual Isolation operator’, ‘General Isolation operator’, 
‘Isolation coordinator’, ‘Maintenance Department Safety Manager’, ‘Safety Work Order Approver’, 
‘Planner’ do not necessarily mean dedicated functions. Depending on the plant and organization, 
one person can often be in charge for several single activities. Roles must be described in detail 
and persons nominated and listed.
 
9
5.2 
Assessment to identify & to inventory all types of energy 
 
• Every plant must conduct an assessment of all energy sources present on the plant; that 
assessment must include the following: 
– Chemical energy (gases, petroleum, steam, etc.) 
– Electrical energy (AC, DC, batteries, capacitors, etc.) 
– Hydraulics (systems, accumulators, etc) 
– Mechanical energy (kinetic and potential energy) 
– Pneumatics  
– Thermal energy 
– Radiation 
– ……. 
• The assessment should include the potential for, and consequences of, human errors. 
• Once the energy sources are determined, an isolation inventory must be set up. 
• Define a working area that must be clearly delimited to avoid interference with any 
neighbouring not isolated energy source  
• Consider risk reduction measures such as (but not restricted to): 
– reducing pressure and/or temperature; 
– reducing inventory; 
– detailed planning of the work: 
• 
to minimize the duration of exposure to broken containment; 
• 
to reduce the duration of the isolation; and 
• 
to ensure that the correct type and quantity of PPE is immediately available; 
– restricting incompatible or non-essential work nearby; 
– restricting access around the worksite by barriers; 
– reducing the number of people working on the plant; 
– monitoring the isolation more frequently; 
– having an operator in attendance throughout the isolation; and/or increasing supervision. 
– … 
5.3 
List / inventory all isolation points 
 
• The plant must be divided into areas and the machines listed in each area. For each of the 
equipments the types of energy sources present are to be listed. The isolation point of each 
energy source must be determined and listed. When listing these energy source isolation 
points, the following must be included: 
– Upstream or downstream impact of isolation (safety related impact) 
– PPE required during isolation 
• A labelling policy for the isolation points should be defined for the whole plant. 
• The isolation inventory can then be used to determine all the energy sources that need to be 
isolated and locked out when work needs to be done on a specific machine, regardless the 
type of task that will be performed.  
• When working on machines, the machine must be locked out, taking into account as well the 
other machines / equipment in the area that could endanger the safety of workers and as a 
consequence those machines / equipment must be isolated and locked out as well. 
 
5.4 
Assessment to build a respective isolation work instruction 
 
• Appointing a person (Isolation coordinator and/or maintenance manager/supervisor) who 
through supervision ensures isolation procedures are rigorously applied. 
• Defining and appointing responsibilities for isolation activities. 
• The development of the written isolation work instruction should be done in consultation with 
relevant health and safety representatives, operators, people who are doing adjustments, 
cleaning, maintenance, repairs or inspections of the plant and, if possible, with plant 
manufacturers, suppliers and people who designed and installed the plant. If the appropriate 
expertise does not exist at the workplace for the development of procedures, the employer 
should engage the services of a suitably qualified person or persons.
 
10
• Isolation work instructions are written documents which are accessible to the relevant 
employees at the workplace. 
• The isolation procedures must require isolation work instructions for all situations under which 
the isolation procedure is to be implemented. 
• All equipment must have written isolation work instructions developed from a risk assessment. 
These procedures will set out how the equipment is to be made safe and kept safe. It will 
include, for example: decontamination; venting of stored energy; securing of rotors or fan 
blades; chocking of vehicles, disconnecting, blocking or bleeding of equipment, cables, pipes 
and vessels. It will also show the isolation points for lockout and test procedures as well as the 
procedure to remove another person’s lock/tag. 
 
Written Isolation Work Instructions  
. 
Written isolation work instruction must be developed and revised by a competent person with 
knowledge of the equipment, area, process and task, and must include: 
• Description of tasks or areas made safe by the procedure, including the means and sequence 
by which the isolation will be achieved and the checks that are to be performed prior to the 
commencement of work 
• The identification/description of equipment, devices or items requiring energy control. 
• Identification of isolation devices. 
• Identification of all temporary connections or back feeds planned during the isolation. 
• The method used to isolate (e.g., open electrical breaker, physical disconnection, blocking, 
pinning, pressure release) will be included when required for clarity 
• The identification of possible sources of stored energy, and a description of how to dissipate 
or restrain the energy will be included when isolation is complex and the nature of the stored 
energy is not readily apparent. 
• A description of how to verify the energy control effectiveness will be included for all isolations. 
• Date, author and approver is required on IWI 
• Revision history 
 
5.5 
A permit to work procedure and lock out permit  
 
Permit-to-work (PTW) systems are used within safe systems of work to authorize work of a 
hazardous or non-routine nature on a plant as well as for people working in an area to which 
they are not familiar.  
The PTW system supports a range of permit types including access permits, isolation permits, 
confined space permits, hot work & welding permit, critical installation permit, digging permit, 
……etc. A PTW system can impose a detailed step functionality which reduces significantly the 
risk of human error in the application and restoration of isolations.  
 
Therefore tasks that require isolation are described in an Isolation Work Instruction (IWI); the 
isolation procedure should require a Permit-to-Work system which ensures the necessity of an 
IWI for isolation tasks (pre-planned standard isolation lists). 
This PTW will include an extract of the HIRA’s (Job related and related to the work environment).  
PTW should also be used by own personnel when doing a job in an area that is not familiar to 
them to make sure they are informed of and acquainted with the risks of the area. 
In general IWI are sufficient for routine activities; define when PTW must be used e.g.; 
 
• Contractors 
• Multiple 
Lockouts 
& 
Areas 
(ensure 
adequate 
control, 
security, 
monitoring 
and 
communication!!) 
• Non-production work (e.g. maintenance, inspection, testing, construction, dismantling, 
adaptation, modification,…etc) 
• Plant access permit 
• Non–routine operations 
• Transfer of work from one team to an other 
• …..
 
11
6 Training to achieve competency on isolation process 
 
6.1 
Employee Training 
 
• Own employees 
– Initially training and motivational training on the why, who, when and how of lockout 
– When new equipment or energy sources are added to the workplace or changes are made 
– For the purpose of discussion only, we distinguish between 3 types of employees (see also 
definitions in paragraph 4 of this guideline) : 
• 
Affected employee (do not do any lockout themselves); 
– Your job requires you to operate or use installation or equipment on which servicing 
or maintenance is being performed under LOTO or if your job requires you to work in 
an area in which servicing or maintenance is being performed.* 
– Must be trained in; recognition of lockout equipment, the dangers of overriding 
lockout, prohibitions against attempting to operate any equipment that they have 
been notified is locked out, or appears to be locked out and must be tested to make 
sure they have the required knowledge 
• 
Individual isolation operator (own lockout); 
– You apply LOTO for yourself one to installation or equipment in order to perform 
servicing or maintenance on installation or equipment  
– Must be trained in full detail of the lockout procedure, hazards associated with 
uncontrolled energy, written lockout program, proper techniques for applying lockout 
and must have been tested to make sure they have the required knowledge and 
skills 
• 
General isolation operator (authorized person); 
– You apply LOTO for yourself and for others to installation or equipment in order to 
perform servicing or maintenance on installation or equipment 
– Must be trained in full detail of the lockout procedure, hazards associated with 
uncontrolled energy, written lockout program, proper techniques for applying lockout 
and must have been tested to make sure they have the required knowledge and 
skills 
 
• Contractors 
– Information / training must be given to all contractors and or other employers 
– Require them to respect the lockout procedures and locked out equipment in all related 
aspects 
– Contractors can be ‘authorized’; this requires a detailed training, testing of their knowledge 
and they must be sufficiently acquainted with the equipment and environment. 
 
• Visitors 
– Information about the general isolation procedure must be given as is appropriate for the 
visit they will be making to the plant and equipment. 
 
6.2 
Employee Retraining 
 
Retraining will be provided whenever one of these situations occur: 
 
• Change in job assignments; 
• Change in machines, equipment or process present a new hazard; 
• Change in the energy lockout/energy control procedures; 
• Whenever a periodic inspection reveals, or there is a reason to believe, that there are 
deviations from or inadequacies in the knowledge or use of the energy lockout procedures; 
• 
Annual program evaluations; 
• Accidents, near hits or dangerous acts or dangerous situations whereby the effectiveness of 
the lockout program is in doubt; after written procedures are revised.
 
12
7 Planning and preparation of equipment 
 
Adequate planning requires: 
 
• enabling task-specific risk assessments and/or pre-planned standard isolation lists (IWI)  to be 
made and mitigation actions put in place; 
• identifying whether a larger section of the plant might need to be shut down or the work 
deferred; 
• identifying interaction with other sections of plant subject to temporary isolation; 
• involving sequencing and co-ordination of intrusive work with other plant operations; 
• including a ‘walk-the-plant’ step, to check that the installation matches with what is described 
and, especially, that all isolation points have been identified and are accessible/ can be 
operated, etc; 
• ensuring preparation and co-ordination of job documentation such as risk assessments, 
method statements, permits and isolation permits; 
• ensuring cross-referencing of relevant permits; and 
• enabling all necessary tools, equipment, materials, etc (including any additional personal 
protective equipment required for those installing and removing positive isolations) to be 
available at the worksite at the start of the job. 
• listing any additional unplanned or ad-hoc tasks and lockouts that may be required during a 
planned maintenance. These can be important tasks that came up after final planning the 
previous day(s). If possible, avoid those tasks because they will always create supplementary 
hazards and risks. 
• the deferent responsibilities for the planning preparation must be defined into a procedure
 
13
8 Emergency procedures 
 
• Consider also in the risk reduction measures the easy way to allow workers to escape in an 
emergency due to a failure of a lock out put in place. In this respect: make sure any 
mechanical blockage applied if failsafe in it’s own! 
• During an emergency where (a) person(s) is (are) involved in an incident of electrical burns 
(flash) or electric shock , the normal electric shock  first aid procedures must be followed. 
These are displayed prominently inside all electrical switch rooms, control rooms and sub-
stations and must be followed and applied by trained first aiders, including requesting 
assistance from the medical emergency services. 
• The required response during an emergency is captured in the emergency procedures 
document of each plant or department with all required details; mock drills must be done with 
specific reference to incorrect isolation and lockout procedures. All such incidents must be 
captured on an occurrence safety management system for formal investigation and corrective 
actions.
 
14
9 Isolation methods & their use 
 
9.1 
Lock Out 
 
Lock out is the best way of working and must systematically according to the standard as 
described in standard AM Safety ST 001.  
9.2 
Tag out 
 
When lockout doesn’t yet exist and as a consequence tag out systems are temporarily used 
during the transitions phase, employees shall be trained (apart from the proper application of the 
procedure) on the following limitations of tags: 
  
• Tags are essentially warning devices affixed to energy isolating devices, and do not provide 
the physical restraint on those devices that is provided by a lock and thus not the same 
level of safety.  
• When a tag is attached to an energy isolating means, it is not to be removed without 
authorization of the authorized person responsible for it, and it is never to be bypassed, 
ignored, or otherwise defeated.  
• Tags must be legible and understandable by all authorized employees, affected employees, 
and all other employees whose work operations are or may be in the area, in order to be 
effective.  
• Tags and their means of attachment must be made of materials which will withstand the 
environmental conditions encountered in the workplace.  
• Tags may evoke a false sense of security, and their meaning needs to be understood as part 
of the overall energy control program.  
• Tags must be securely attached to energy isolating devices so that they cannot be 
inadvertently or accidentally detached during use.  
 
9.3 
Failures 
 
The greater the potential hazard, the more effective, secure and controlled the isolation should 
be.  
Where a number of options for risk exclusions exist, you must use the lowest-final-risk option that 
is reasonably practicable. Engineering solutions are preferred to procedural controls or to reliance 
on the use of personal protective equipment (PPE). 
 
All isolation methods can fail (even positive isolations – particularly during installation and plant 
reinstatement activities). The potential for human failure is a major factor affecting the overall 
reliability of an isolation method. The performance of an isolation depends not only on the 
integrity of the isolation hardware, but also on the adequacy of the arrangements to identify each 
isolation point, secure the isolation, prove/monitor the isolation and maintain overall control of the 
work. When selecting an isolation method, you should consider the potential for technical and 
human failure.  
 
9.4 
Controlling changes 
 
Any change to isolation arrangements should be reviewed, reassessed and authorized. When 
an isolation deviation occurs, whether controlled by isolation work permit or a safe work isolation 
instruction, stop the task and re-evaluate it and take appropriate actions before continuing the 
execution of the task(s) !
 
15
9.5 
Exception 
 
A. Work on small cord and plug equipped equipment where the plug can remain under the 
control of the employee performing the work and unplugging the cord completely isolates all 
hazardous energy. EXAMPLE: Changing the bit in a portable drill. 
 
An acceptable approach to rendering the equipment inoperative for the worker doing the work 
is to : 
1. disconnect the plug from its electrical supply, 
2. keep the plug in sight and within reach so that no one else can accidentally plug in the 
equipment, and 
3. keep the plug under his or her exclusive and immediate control at all times while working 
on the equipment. 
 
If the worker leaves the equipment unattended and the work is incomplete, then the worker 
must verify that the plug is disconnected from its supply before the worker resumes work on 
the equipment. 
 
In the case of permanently connected equipment, the worker must lock out the equipment’s 
energy isolating device(s) e.g. circuit breaker, disconnect switch, etc. before proceeding with 
the work. 
 
 
B. Working on live equipment  
 
No person is allowed to do maintenance and repairs on live equipment. After faultfinding, 
lockout must be performed to carry out the necessary repairs.  
 
However, some tasks such as lubricating or adjusting moving equipment or machines are 
done on live equipment and as a consequence (a) specific task procedure(s) must be in place, 
personnel must be trained, tested and declared competent to perform such tasks and they 
must furthermore be equipped with supporting tools to mitigate risk. Risks must be analyzed 
and the safety of employees may not be compromised. 
• Nobody shall permit or require any person other than a competent person or a person who 
has been trained to the satisfaction of an inspector to do any task on or near any live 
installation if such task may endanger him … 
• When performing a task on live equipment there must be a second person in the area who 
has visual control on the performer.
 
16
C. Temporarily activation 
 
On certain occasions it is necessary to activate equipment that was locked out for a short 
period to move a piece of equipment or to test a part of the machine. Despite the fact that 
lifting isolation through the process as described in this document and then to request isolation 
and to perform it again, could, and in many cases, will take a very long time, the procedure as 
spelled out below must be followed in all such cases to ensure the safety of all workers 
involved and those not involved in the specific task and on the specific machine. 
 
Different steps: 
 
1. The person in charge of the task will ensure that all team members and other present 
people vacate the installation/ area of danger. 
2. All team members as well as other people present will remove their personal isolation locks 
from the key safe / lock box. This action states that they are not locked out anymore and 
may not enter the machine.  
3. The person in charge of the task, must post “guards or watch man” in adequately 
structured places or secure the area to ensure that no person is able to enter the machine / 
danger area. These watch persons must remain on guard until the equipment is locked out 
again. 
4. The person in charge of the task will request for the part / piece of equipment to be 
activated and will make available the key/s. The rest of the keys of the equipment that 
remains locked out, must be protected by locking it out again with his/her lock on the key 
safe / lock box of the team. 
5. After completion of the test / movement of equipment, the energy source/s must be locked 
out again and the keys returned and locked out on the key safe / lock box. 
6. All team members will again lock out with their personal isolation locks on the key safe / 
lock box. 
7. The “guards” may be removed and the team may enter the machine and continue to work.
 
17
 
10 Isolation process 
 
10.1 
Securing isolations 
 
Isolations must remain secure through the full duration of the intrusive task. The degree of 
security required for isolation will be proportionate to the risks resulting from isolation failure. 
Use locking arrangements to physically prevent accidental or unauthorized removal of the 
isolation. 
 
All plant and equipment relating to each specific isolation should be clearly identified on the 
worksite. Permanent labelling for this purpose is required. All isolation points, including bleeds, 
spades and main electrical, pneumatic and hydraulic switches/ valves etc. should be fully 
documented, identified and referenced within the work control system to ensure the correct 
position and sequencing of all the components associated with an isolation scheme. This is in 
addition to full checks at the worksite.  
 
10.2 
Detailed Isolation Procedure Steps (example) 
 
i. 
Request for isolation 
 
• 
The request for isolation should be the result of a work permit for a planned or non-
planned activity on equipment. Traceability of all the involved persons and their 
responsibilities should be clear and signed off. There must be a written document which 
shall be recorded during a defined time. 
• 
Who can request for isolation : 
- After the completion of lockout training and being declared competent, one may be 
appointed as authorized to request lockout that must be performed by the General 
Isolation Operator.  
• 
When an Individual and General Isolation Operator requests lockout, he/she must follow 
the procedures as set out in the training manual. 
• 
An Individual Isolation Operator can become a General Isolation Operator for a 
specified task after having been trained and tested. He/see will put locks on the 
equipment for him/herself and those working with him; the following will apply: 
- Isolate and lock out the equipment with his/her personal isolation lock. 
- Attach his/her lock identification tag on the lock. 
- The isolation lock key goes into a lock box or key safe if a team is working with 
him/her. 
- Other team members lock out on the same lock box or key safe using their personal 
isolation locks. 
- There must be a proper transfer of responsibility. Lock can stay on the isolation point 
but there must be a transfer with a lock somewhere e.g. at the isolation coordinator 
and on the lock-box between the users of the lockout. 
 
ii. 
Identify all energy sources and other hazards, Risk assessment and selection of 
isolation practice (HIRA) 
 
• 
All energy sources likely to re-activate the plant, and places where people doing the 
work at risk, should be identified in an assessment (IWI, inventory, check lists,…). 
• 
If original designer and installer “as built” diagrams of plant installations are not 
available, new diagrams/photographs showing location and details of various plant 
components, isolation points, switches, valves, energy lines, pipes, power sources, and 
control points (including computers) need to be developed as part of the isolation 
procedures. These diagrams/photographs can then also be used, along with the IWI’s, 
for information and training of workers.
 
18
• 
Shutting the plant down may require other hazards to be identified and the risk of injury 
eliminated or minimized. For example, associated equipment may need to be locked-
out to prevent re-activation, or valves on pipes and lines carrying gases or fluids may 
need to be locked shut or blanked off. 
• 
Depending on the type of plant, other hazards may include: hazardous substances, 
such as gases, acids, alkalis and solvents, falls, burns, asphyxiation, impact……..  
• 
Risk can be different when the equipment is charged with material or if it is free of 
material. 
 
The IWI needs to be completed whenever a new task/hazard combination is identified. It 
should be reviewed and revised when appropriate, which may include a change to the task, 
procedure, or equipment design; anyway a regular review of documents is needed (e.g. 
once per year). 
 
iii. 
Identify all isolation points 
 
• 
All plants and equipment of a type that could require an isolation procedure should be 
designed with appropriate isolation points for all energy sources to enable work on the 
plant or equipment to be carried out safely. 
• 
It is important to identify all isolation points in a system, as it may be necessary to use a 
local isolator to shut down a specific part of the machine (e.g. a motor) while the 
remainder of the associated plant or equipment remains in operation. 
• 
Emergency stop buttons and similar stop devices on their own will not achieve isolation. 
It is extremely dangerous and therefore not allowed to rely solely on emergency 
stopping devices, as they are not designed for frequent use, cannot be locked out in all 
cases and may allow energy to be inadvertently re-activated. They may also allow 
control circuits to remain live. Remote control rooms and process computers should be 
considered when identifying isolation points. 
• 
Consider secondary power supplies as well as the primary supplies. 
 
iv. 
Preparation for shut down 
 
• 
During planned maintenance days, the available time is of critical importance and 
must be utilized in an effective manner. Lockout of equipment on a planned 
maintenance stop could take a long time. Define rules and guidelines to ensure that 
lockout commences as soon as the plant or equipment has been stopped and the 
execution is done in an efficient way. 
• 
Notify affected employees that the equipment is being locked out for maintenance. 
• 
Plants or equipment that has a single energy source can usually be shut down by the 
operation of a single control such as a switch or valve. More complex plants or 
equipment may have to be shut down in a certain sequence, e.g. one conveyor before 
another, or by shutting down several energy sources, e.g. electricity, hydraulics, 
pneumatics, petrol, oil, steam, LPG, LNG, coal etc. 
• 
Unscheduled repairs need special attention: the use of a PTW or prepared work orders 
(repair works that are foreseen but not planned) must include a risk assessment and 
appropriate explanation to the person(s) performing the task prior to the start of the 
task. 
 
v. 
Machine or equipment shutdown 
 
General Isolation Operators or Individual Isolation Operators must shut down the 
equipment, installation, or other system components, placing them in a zero-energy state. 
All potential energy (mechanical, electrical, gas, hydraulic, pneumatic, hydrostatic, 
suspended mass, rolling stock on a slope, etc.) must be eliminated, purged, relieved, 
discharged or blocked out in a safe manner. Persons responsible for isolation must test for 
zero potential before tasks on the plant or equipment commences. The person, who is 
executing the work, must perform a test to confirm effective lockout.
 
19
Trace all systems to locate and lockout energy sources. The main source may be 
electrical, for instance, but pneumatic and other forms of energy may also be present. 
Always look for other possible energy sources. 
 
All equipment capable of being energized or activated electrically, pneumatically, or 
hydraulically etc must be de-energized or de-activated by physically disconnecting or 
otherwise making the apparatus inoperable. Make sure that any blockage used is secure 
on its own (e.g. against gravity etc). 
 
Always ensure that the operators are aware of the plan to shut down and lock out 
equipment, installation, or other system components.  
 
In some cases, operations personnel or equipment operators may be required to shut 
down components because of their special qualifications or knowledge of the system 
before lock-out can be done by the Individual or General Isolation Operators. 
 
All contractors who are permanently on site, trained on the isolation procedures and 
demonstrate competency according to approved procedures, can be appointed by the 
management to execute isolation 
 
 
vi. 
Isolate all energy sources 
 
All plant and equipment relating to isolation should be clearly identified and labelled on the 
worksite. Permanent labelling, attached to the isolation point, for this purpose is required. 
All isolation points, including bleeds and spades, should be fully documented and 
referenced within the IWI to ensure the correct position and sequencing of all the 
components associated with an isolation scheme (e.g. the position of vents, the removal of 
physical isolations). This is in addition to full checks at the worksite. 
 
Attach an isolation point identification label to each component of an isolation scheme, 
including bleeds and spades. This allows to check that all necessary isolations are in place 
and gives a visual indication that a device is in active use as a means of isolation. Lock 
numbers should match the line diagrams in the isolation documentation. 
 
 
vii. 
De–energize all stored energies 
 
Take any of the following steps that are necessary to guard against energy left in the plant 
after it has been isolated from its energy sources: 
• 
Inspect the plant to make sure all parts have stopped moving  
• 
Install ground wires  
• 
Relieve available pressure  
• 
Release the tension on springs, or block the movement of spring-driven parts  
• 
Block or brace parts that could fall because of gravity and make sure the blocking is 
stable on its own in all conditions 
• 
Block parts in hydraulic and pneumatic systems that could move from the loss of 
pressure and make sure the blocking it stable on its own in all conditions 
• 
Bleed the lines and leave vent valves open  
• 
Drain process piping systems and close valves to prevent the flow of hazardous 
material  
• 
If a line must be blocked where there is no valve, use a blank flange  
• 
Purge reactor tanks and process lines  
• 
Dissipate extreme cold or heat, or provide protective clothing  
• 
If stored energy can re-accumulate, monitor it to make sure it stays below hazardous 
levels.  
• 
Etc.
 
20
 
viii. 
Applying lockout devices 
 
• 
All relevant energy – isolating devices are to be locked. 
• 
Only standardized devices can be used and they are not to be used for anything else. 
• 
Use a lockout device if your lock cannot be placed directly on the energy control.  
• 
Every employee in the work crew must attach his personal lock and identification label 
on the energy control. If this would not be possible, than the keys of the locks which are 
directly on the energy controls will be locked by all workers using their personal lock 
(e.g. by use of a lock box). There must be a system where the equipment cannot be 
restarted without the removal of each person’s lock/tag. 
• 
When several workers or trades are working on a machine, you can add additional 
locks by using e.g. a lockout bar or similar. One can add any number of locks by 
inserting another lockout bar into the last hole of the previous bar. 
• 
The competent person must first Lock out the energy source(s) and add also his/her 
Individual Lock Identification Tag or general lock identification tag. This will always be 
the first lock on and the last lock off. 
• 
Where isolation involves only one person, that person must be deemed competent by 
site. 
• 
Personal Locks may never be removed except by the person to whom they belong. 
• 
No isolation procedure is deemed as meeting the requirements of this standard if it 
relies on shutting off emergency stops or control power; isolation of electrical sources 
shall be at the primary power source or through the use of a positive lock out device. 
• 
A record, as part of the IWI, must be kept of all equipment locked out or otherwise 
rendered inoperable so that all of these devices can be reactivated once the work is 
complete. 
 
ix. 
Locking 
 
 
• 
Each worker involved in a lockout operation must attach a durable lock identification 
label to his or her personal lock. The individual lock identification label must identify the 
worker’s name, in addition some other information can be mentioned e.g. ; the worker’s 
employer (contractors) and/or the date and time of lockout, the telephone number, 
work area involved, and the reason for the lockout. A lock identification label in itself 
offers no guarantee that a machine or system is locked out. It simply provides 
information. 
 
x. 
Verification of isolation/ de-energizing 
 
• 
After locking and tagging, make sure all danger areas are clear of personnel before 
doing a trial. 
• 
After plant or equipment has been shut down, locked out and tagged, all isolated power 
sources should be tested first with appropriate instruments (pressure, high voltage, 
voltage,..) and then by trying to activate the plant, before any person attempts to start 
work on the plant. This should be done by a person who understands the complexity of 
the plant or equipment (or parts of the plant or equipment, including control stations and 
computers remote from the plant or equipment). 
• 
Verification shall be made that all live circuits, parts, and other sources of hazardous 
energies and products, have been disconnected, released and/or restrained. A general 
isolation operator who is qualified shall operate the equipment operating controls, 
perform voltage verification, inspect open switches and draw out breakers to ensure 
that energy sources are isolated. 
• 
Specific standards must be put in place which describes how qualified General Isolation 
Operators must perform the Voltage verification test and application of grounding. The 
calibration of all instruments required to test isolation procedure should be checked 
before use. 
• 
Press all start buttons and other activating controls on the equipment itself and return 
controls to the off position when testing is complete.
 
21
• 
It is not safe to assume an isolator has locked out an electricity source simply because 
it is in an open position. While normally this should open an air gap between contact 
points, it is possible for contact points to become welded together by the passage of 
electricity, and remain so even when the isolator appears to be open. 
• 
Work on the plant should not begin until tests have confirmed it is safe to do so.  
 
xi. 
Perform the task 
 
Each worker who is working under isolation must assure his own safety by means of a 
personal lock on the isolation point or by means of his personal lock on a lock-box. This 
lock must be added before starting the job.
 
22
xii. 
Re-energizing  
 
• 
Tests and visual inspections; 
 
A General Isolation Operator or an Individual Isolation Operator shall conduct tests and 
visual inspections to verify that all personnel are in the clear and that all tools, electrical 
jumpers, shorts, grounds, and other such devices have been removed so that the 
circuits and equipment can be safely energized.  
• 
Put the safety guards back in the original position; 
• 
Warning employees; 
 
Employees exposed to the hazards associated with reenergizing the circuit or 
equipment shall be warned to stay clear of circuits and equipment. 
• 
Each worker has to remove his own lock 
• 
Removing Lock: 
 
Each lockout device shall be removed from each energy-isolating device by the General 
Isolation Operator or by a Individual Isolation Operator (competent for the specific task), 
i.e. by the one who applied the lockout device. 
• 
Return system to operational status and the switches to power ON. Have qualified 
personnel restart installation or equipment. 
 
 
xiii. 
Return control to operations 
 
When all work is completed, the person in charge of the lockout operation should formally 
return control of the equipment or system to plant personnel. 
 
xiv. 
Record date/time lockout removed and system restored 
 
This last step is important. It saves valuable information that may be lost if not recorded. 
Staff involved in the shutdown may not remain at the same jobsite. Owners or operators 
may require this information to help plan future shutdowns.
 
23
 
Verification of 
isolation 
Risk Assessment 
Request for isolation
PTW
Equipment shutdown
Identify energy 
Identify isolation 
points 
IWI 
Preparation for shutdown
Isolate all energy sources
De-energize all stored energy
Apply lockout devices
Perform the task
Re-energizing
Return control to operating
Record 
date/time 
lockout
Hazardous energy not controlled
Extra work 
required?
Lock and label
Y
Y
N
N
 
24
 
11 Audits/Evaluation and Records 
 
11.1 
Periodic Program Evaluation/ Audits 
 
• Interviews with authorized and affected employees 
• Inspections to ensure that the equipment has been properly locked out 
• Inspection to ensure that all equipment used in lockout is appropriate for your written lockout 
program 
 
11.2 
Record Keeping 
 
• Traceability of the isolation performance 
• Employees training records 
• Periodic program evaluations and follow-up 
• Accident and near hit reports, dangerous acts and dangerous situations 
• Documentation of employee lock removal by others, when inadvertently left on (see 14.9.). 
 
11.3 
Example Program Evaluation 
 
• Are all employees conducting work on the equipment properly trained and defined competent 
on the lockout procedure?
 
25
12 Design, engineering and new, revamped or modified 
equipment 
 
Suitable isolation arrangements on the plant should be clearly specified at the design stage. 
 
The opportunity to achieve an inherently safer design is greatest for new plant and equipment; 
the same approach should be followed for plant modifications and revamps. These opportunities 
must be used to assure the installation is capable of being locked out and in line with the 
company standards and legal requirements, i.e. it is obligatory that the construction of new 
installation or revamp must include the implementation of the state of art isolation system, 
allowing lock out in compliance with AM Safety ST 001. 
 
Consider the reduction of isolation points per isolation so this will simplify the execution of the 
isolation. Also consider isolating on a higher level, global isolation, since it will reduce the 
execution time. 
The potential for human failure, including error, should be addressed and, wherever possible, 
minimized in the design (less isolation points/ technical solutions).
 
26
 
13 Computer Support for the Isolation Process 
 
• A good isolation process requires many information transactions. These transactions come in 
the form of paperwork, electronic data or a combination of both. Good LOTO software can 
help to have a better process and a safer process. If integrated into the existing maintenance 
software, it will reduce the workload significantly. Before considering the many benefits of 
computer support of the LOTO process you must ask yourself if this support for LOTO is the 
right thing to do (now)? 
– Technical aspect: IT support, integration in the existing software, it is a safety tool,… 
– Financial feasibility: ROI, great payback potential, reducing the overall time to complete the 
work,  
– Process improvement: change of the process and commitments of all participants 
 
• Benefits : how can LOTO software make the equipment lock-out and workers safer? 
– Reduce human errors? 
– Less space for changes; restrictive environment, not allowing additional work to be 
assigned to open or active work orders, …. 
– Restricted work flow 
– Shared lockout; only one lock/tag on the isolation point; this feature significantly reduces 
the workload and simplifies a complex procedure. 
– Time reduction 
– Safer planning 
– Integration into the Maintenance Management System (Work permits and orders) 
– Conflict checks 
– Maximum communication 
– Recording the LOTO activities 
– Coordination
 
27
14 Practical guidance’s 
  
14.1 
Shift or personnel changes 
 
In order to ensure the continuity of lockout protection, this section contains a provision for the 
orderly transfer of lockout device protection between off going and oncoming employees, to 
minimize exposure to hazards from the unexpected energizing or start up of the machine or 
equipment, or release of stored energy: 
• The off going employee shall communicate with the oncoming employee as to the machine or 
equipment status and compliance with the lockout procedures prior to leaving shift. 
• The off going employee shall in the case of e.g. a lock box closed with an individual 
department lock of the General Isolation Operator, remove his personal lock affixed to the lock 
box and the oncoming employee add his/her own personal lock to the existing previous shift’s 
lock box; the individual department lock of the general isolation operator must be appropriately 
changed face to face with the oncoming general isolation operator. OR 
• If only involving a single locking device (personal lock), the off going employee shall 
accompany the oncoming employee to the affected equipment or machine where isolation 
devices (locks) will be appropriately changed (face to face) over without energizing. 
 
 
14.2 
One person, One lock 
 
• All persons who are working on the same plant or equipment shall attach their own lock to 
prevent the isolator being opened before all locks have been removed or opened. The 
isolation procedure should identify common lock out points to ensure energy cannot be 
restored while someone is still working on the plant. 
• If two or more people are working on plant that is isolated through several lockout points, each 
person should attach a lock to each lockout point. 
• As an alternative, to avoid the need for multiple locks on each lockout point, a lock box may be 
used. Under this system each lockout point is locked by only one lock and the key(s) to the 
locks of the plant’s resp. equipment lockout points are placed inside a box which is locked by 
all the individual locks of all persons working on the same plant resp. equipment. 
• In case of an IT supported isolation system the related permit to work has to be put into or 
fixed to a lock box (must be visual and readable). The keys connected to the permits have to 
be kept by a nominated responsible person in the organization. The signed off of the permit to 
work at the end of the work is necessary before you de-isolating.  
 
14.3 
One lock, One key 
 
• Each person working on the plant should have his / her own individual lock and key. There 
should be no duplicate key available for any lock, except a master or duplicate key for use in 
an emergency that is secured and not readily available (See 13.6. for detailed explication). 
• During inspection, repair, maintenance, cleaning or adjustment of the plant, the one key to 
each person’s lock should be held only by that person, who is responsible for both locking and 
unlocking the lockout device.
 
28
14.4 
Multiple energy sources 
 
• If more than one energy source or hazard has to be locked out to enable safe shutdown of the 
plant, the single key to each lockout device or lock sets should be held by the same person. 
 
14.5 
Locks 
 
Different locks can be used to apply to the isolation procedure, the use must be described and in 
line with the principal of one key, one lock and one person. Locks and keys must always be 
traceable up to one responsible nominated person who is the owner of them. 
 
Locks can be made traceable in at least two ways: 
 
• they can bear a marking unique to each worker e.g. engraved name, identification code, 
colour code, symbol code, etc., or 
 
• incorporate an lock identification tag; individual lock identification tag or general lock 
identification tag that identifies the worker or service/department to whom the lock is assigned. 
If this method is used, the lock identification tag must be secured to the lock in such a way that 
the tag cannot fall off. 
 
The practical use of locks will be explained more in detail in the training on these guidelines. 
Nevertheless we can give some overview of the different types of locks that are available in our 
sites.  
 
 
Securing individual workers :  
 
Personal Safety Locks / individual locks 
 
Each worker involved must attach his or her own personal lockable securing device, typically a 
keyed padlock, to the energy isolating device. 
 
A worker who has placed a lock is also responsible for verifying that the energy source has been 
effectively isolated. 
 
In the case where more than one worker is working at the same isolation point, each worker must 
attach his or her own personal lockable securing device, typically a keyed padlock, to the energy 
isolating device. 
 
When using personal locks and in the case where the worker is reassigned before the work is 
completed, or the work is extended from one shift to another, continuity of hazardous energy 
control must be maintained. 
 
A safety lock used for individual safety (1 person, 1 lock and 1 key principle) is : 
• Supplied with one unique key 
• Used only by person identified on the label 
 
 
Securing groups 
 
When multiple workers are involved or multiple energy isolating devices must be secured, a 
group process must be used. 
 
A GIO or a competent IIO (declared responsible for a defined task and responsible for a team of 
workers) must then;
 
29
• 
place a securing device (typically a keyed padlock) on each energy isolating device,  
• 
put the key to each securing device in a lockable key securing device (lock box, key ring, 
etc.) an apply his or her personal lock 
• 
complete, sign, and post a list identifying the machinery or equipment included in the 
procedure, and 
• 
confirm and document that all hazardous energy sources in the group lockout situation 
are effectively isolated. 
 
Documenting this step provides a record of the activity having been completed. This is not 
confirming that the locks were placed in the correct locations. This is making sure that placement 
of the locks has resulted in the energy sources being effectively isolated. Having a worker confirm 
that locks are physically placed in the correct location is not the same as verifying that all energy 
sources are effectively isolated. 
 
Once effective isolation has been verified and before starting the work activity, each worker 
involved in the work then applies his or her own lock to the key securing device. This ensures that 
the master key(s) cannot be removed from the key securing device until each worker removes his 
or her personal lock. This prevents the equipment from being returned to operation until each 
personal lock is removed. 
 
In the case where a worker is reassigned before the work is completed, or the work is extended 
from one shift to another, continuity of hazardous energy control must be maintained. 
 
Upon completing the work, each worker removes his or her lock from the key securing device. 
When the last lock is removed, the worker authorized by the employer to do so then removes his 
or her lock from the energy isolating device and verifies that no worker will be in danger due to 
removal of the lock. 
 
 
Equipment Safety Locks  
 
Used onto the energy source and fitted by a General Isolation Operator or a competent Individual 
Isolation Operator used for the purposes of locking equipment out of service and must be: 
• Identified with the name of the department/service and user of the locks must be traceable.  
• Supplied with only one unique key; 
• Accompanied by a system to log which locks have been applied, the reason for application 
and to transfer authority for the lock (e.g., from shift to shift).  
• These locks are not to be used as personal safety locks. 
 
 
Multiple safety lock sets  
 
Multiple safety lock sets are typically used when several pieces of equipment must be locked out 
and a lock box is used. Mostly installed by a General Isolation Operator or a competent Individual 
Isolation Operator on the equipment : 
• Keyed alike in multiple sets; 
• Supplied with one unique key only per set; 
• Equipped with a suitable lock identification tag on the key to identify the lock set and the 
number of locks that the key opens. Identified with the name of the department on the lock or 
on a lock identification tag*, and identified as a set. 
 
*(Lock identification tags can be permanently attached or of a temporary nature as long as they 
identify the lock.)
 
30
 
The Use of Multiple Safety Lock Sets 
 
The use of multiple safety lock sets shall meet the following conditions: 
• Multiple safety lock sets are installed by the Isolation Coordinator or the General Isolation 
Operator and must be installed first prior to work commencing and removed last, when the job 
is complete. 
• Once the multiple safety lock set is applied, there must be a signature of the Isolation 
Coordinator or the General Isolation Operator on or the IWI or the PTW or the equipment lock 
out list (completed and signed by nominated responsible person of the department confirming 
that the procedure has been followed, energy has been dissipated or restrained and isolation 
effectiveness checked) is to be added. 
• The signed and dated IWP or IWI document must be secured in the appropriate lock box so it 
is visible and readable. The document must indicate which IWI has been used for the isolation 
or what specifically has been isolated. 
• The key(s) to the multiple safety lock set(s) must be locked in the same lock box and be 
visible, when the lockbox is in use. 
• The Isolation Coordinator or the General Isolation Operator applies his / her own personal 
safety lock to the box. 
• All other personnel working in the area apply their personal safety lock to the box, after 
ensuring that their specific job procedure isolation requirements are satisfied. 
 
Multiple safety lock sets may be used as an extension of one person’s personal safety lock, if all 
of the following conditions are met: 
• The use and user of a multiple lock set must be identified and recorded 
• The key remains in the control of the person relying on the locks. 
 
 
Equipment Locks for "Out Of Service" or long term lock out (see 14.6) 
 
Locks may be used for purposes other than protecting personal safety, such as locking a piece of 
equipment out of service. Accompanied by a system to log which locks have been applied, the 
reason for application e.g. a motor is out of service and the new one is not yet arrived.  
 
 
Lock Boxes 
 
Lock boxes are used in conjunction with multiple safety lock sets and where teams are working 
under the same isolation. Lock boxes must be visible, and clearly labelled If more than one lock 
box is used in an area, they may be colour-coded to differentiate between the boxes. 
Lock boxes should be located so that they are easily accessible to all those working on the job. 
The key(s) to the multiple safety lock set(s) must be locked in the lock box and be visible, when 
the lockbox is in use. 
The completed IWI or PTW which include a equipment lock out list must be secured in the 
appropriate lock box so it is visible for anyone to review prior to the start of their work. The posted 
document must also include a location for a signature so that those performing the isolation can 
indicate that all isolation points have been isolated and locked, that energy has been dissipated 
or restrained, and that the isolation effectiveness has been verified. The document must indicate 
which procedure has been used for the isolation or what specifically has been isolated.
 
31
 
14.6 
Long term lockout 
 
• If a task takes a long period, then we do not talk about long term lockout because people are 
working on the equipment. Long term lockout may be for other reasons, examples of which 
could be: 
- 
A machine taken out of operation for a long period for whatever reason, but will be used 
again. 
- 
A machine or equipment locked out for repairs but money only available at a later stage. 
- 
A machine or equipment locked out for a long period as spares will take a long time to 
arrive. 
- 
A machine or equipment locked out for a long period due to economical reasons. 
• In situations like these, the responsible superintendent must complete a lockout register and a 
danger card and an isolation lock must be attached to the supply energy source/s. A note 
must be made on the lockout register and back of the danger card as to the reason for long 
term lockout. 
• The responsible superintendent will keep the lockout register and isolation lock/s key/s in 
his/her possession until such time that the equipment is to be put in operation again. The 
supervisor will then sign off the IWP or the lockout register and make the isolation lock key/s 
available to set the equipment back into operation. So basically the same lockout procedures 
must be followed but the person in charge (authorized person) will be the responsible 
supervisor. 
 
14.7 
Permanent Lockout 
 
• There is no such practice as permanent lockout. Good engineering practices dictate that 
where a machine or equipment is taken out of use permanently, the supply energy sources 
are removed permanently and the plant drawings updated accordingly. The original electrical 
power source (feeder, panel, etc.) is then marked “Spare” with electrical cables disconnected 
and removed. Mechanical power sources must likewise be stripped out / blanked off 
permanently. 
 
14.8 
Out of service tag 
 
• 
If equipment is faulty labeled, place an out of service tag on it and report to your 
supervisor.  This equipment should not be used or operated while an out of service tag is 
attached. 
14.9 
Removal of lockout by another person 
 
• This procedure must be followed when the physical removal of a lockout lock is required by 
any other person than the one who placed it on the equipment originally. 
• Remember, removing a lockout lock from a piece of equipment is a serious act and must be 
treated as such.  Every precaution must be taken to protect the person who originally placed 
the lock or tag on the equipment and have him or her return and remove the lockout device. 
• The following procedure must be completed before a lockout lock is removed by anyone other 
than the person who originally placed it. When the authorized employee who applied the 
lockout or tagout device is not available to remove it, the device may be removed under the 
direction of another authorized employee provided that (all steps to be fulfilled before 
removing) : 
– It has been decided it is absolutely necessary to remove the lockout at this time. 
– It is determined who placed the lock on the equipment. 
– that person is contacted to find out if he or she is (still) present in the plant.
 
32
– If the person can not be reached, that person's department is contacted to determine if he 
or she is (still) present in the plant. 
– If the employee is in the plant, he/she is asked to remove the lock.  
– If the employee is at home, it is first determined if there is enough time for him/her to come 
to the site to remove the lockout lock. 
– If the lock has to be removed immediately, the person is informed that it is being removed, 
and he / she upon next arrival at the site must personally talk to the department head or his 
designee before returning to work and similarly the department has to assure the person is 
seen and spoken to before he/she resumes any work (in order to assure there is no 
confusion on the situation, since such a confusion may put the person at risk). 
• If the employee cannot be reached at all, nor in the plant or at home, the person desiring to 
remove the lock will contact the following people (in all cases, at least two persons are 
necessary, incl. the chief of the department): 
– A maintenance mechanical or electrical person etc, depending on the kind of isolation to be 
taken away; 
– An operating person if one is assigned to the area; 
– Chief of the department. 
• These persons will : 
– determine why the lock was originally placed on the equipment. They will search the area 
for person/persons or equipment that may be in danger if the power is restored or the 
equipment started.  They will watch the equipment to keep people from entering the area 
while the lock is removed and power restored. 
– Verify that the employee has left the plant or is not able to remove his own lock. 
– Determine if the job is complete and equipment is ready to be put into service and 
everyone is in the clear. 
– If the lock has to been removed (immediately) without the person being informed, assure 
the person is seen and spoken to before he/she resumes any work (in order to assure 
there is no confusion on the situation, since such confusion may put the person at risk). 
– Assure these actions are documented in writing and signed by all involved 
 
 
 
 
14.10 
 Complex group process (e.g. shared lockout) 
 
In some cases it may not be reasonably practicable to use an individual or group lock out 
process. To maintain worker safety, normal group lock out practices may need to be adapted or 
modified. A complex group control process allows an employer to do this. The complex group 
control process relies on written procedures and a work permit or master lockout procedure to 
ensure the safety of workers. These two elements replace the traditional approach of each worker 
placing a personal lock on each energy isolating device. 
• Identical isolation requests of different demanders on the same installation or equipment, or 
parts of it, can be coordinated and performed only once by a qualified person. This specific 
practice must be coordinated by a competent person in the organization and under specific 
conditions which must be described in the isolation procedure. Clear communication will be 
established. 
• The isolation coordinator can group different isolation requests into a mother isolation, one per 
technical specialty (electrical, hydraulic, mechanical, ….etc). In general the mother isolation 
will be on a high level, i.e. shutdown of a whole installation.  
• A risk assessment shall be done to identify if supplementary risks will occur due to this 
practice.  
 
This method is not to be used as an ‘easy escape’, but applies only in very well 
investigated cases.
 
33
 
14.11 
 Example; Positive Lockout of fluids 
 
 
 
Example blanking!                                
 
 
 
 
Example of a selection tool to establish the ‘baseline standard’ for a final isolation.  
HSE\Selection 
Isolation class.pdf   
Appendix 1: AM Safety ST 001 v1 - Guidelines FPS Isolation - Appendix 1 - English.pdf
 
34
 
14.12 
 Example; High Voltage Procedures  
 
In addition to the guidelines for lockout, there are more stringent safety requirements for 
high voltage systems. As an example take the following information into account : 
 
• Ensure that only authorized employees work around high voltage equipment.  
• Provide a High Voltage warning sign when necessary. 
• Ensure that terminal voltage ratings can withstand surges caused by 
electrical faults or switching transients.  
• Be careful around output circuits even when the input power is off. Parallel 
power sources and energy storage devices can still be dangerous.  
• Be careful when working with power supplies that serve more than one area.  
• Before working in a high voltage area, inspect the power supply and check all 
protective devices. 
• Do not work alone near high voltage.  
• Label equipment to identify power sources. Label input power sources to 
identify connected power supply loads.  
• Attach emergency shutdown instructions and phone numbers to equipment 
that is remotely controlled or unattended while energized.  
 
Before entering a power supply or associated equipment enclosure to work on 
hazardous energy sources, complete the following:  
• De-energize the equipment. 
 
• Lockout/ the main input power circuit breaker.  
• Check for auxiliary power circuits that could still be energized.  
• Inspect automatic shorting devices for proper operation.  
• Short the power supply with grounding hooks.  
 
Minimum Clear Working Space  
 
The following table from the National Electric Code provides minimum depth of clear 
working space in front of electrical equipment:  
   
Minimum Clear Distance [NEC Table 110.34(A)] 
Normal 
Voltage to 
Ground 
Condition 1 
Condition 2 
Condition 3 
601-2,500 V 
900 mm (3 
ft) 
1.2 m (4 ft) 
1.5 m (5 ft) 
2,501-9,000 
V 
1.2 m (4 ft) 
1.5 m (5 ft) 
1.8 m (6 ft) 
9001-25,000 
V 
1.5 m (5 ft) 
1.8 m (6 ft) 
2.8 m (9 ft) 
25,001-75 
kV 
1.8 m (6 ft) 
2.5 m (8 ft) 
3.0 m (10 ft) 
Above 75 kV 
2.5 m (8 ft) 
3.0 m (10 ft) 
3.7 m (12 ft) 
 
Where conditions (1), (2), and (3) are as follows:
 
35
(1)  Exposed live parts on one side and no live or grounded parts on the other 
side of the working space, or exposed live parts on both sides effectively 
guarded by suitable wood or other insulating materials. Insulated wire or 
insulated bus bars operating at not over 300 volts shall not be considered 
live parts.  
 
(2)  Exposed live parts on one side and grounded parts on the other side. 
Concrete, brick, or tile walls will be considered as grounded surfaces.  
 
(3)  Exposed live parts on both sides of the workspace [not guarded as 
provided in condition (1)] with the operator between.  
 
 
 
C:\Documents and 
Settings\johan.remme 
Appendix 1: AM Safety ST 001 v1 - Guidelines FPS Isolation - Appendix 2 - English.pdf
 
36
15 References 
 
 
1. 
Metal Industry Guidelines for Safe Work; section 5 Machine Guarding and Lockout 
2. 
Lockout; Safe practices for isolation of all sources of energy in Sawmills; 1 Timber 
Processing Information Sheet 
3. 
Guidance on Safe Isolation Procedures; HSE Select 
4. 
http://www.ohsa.gov. Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
5. 
http://www.bgsu.edu/offices/envhs/page18446.html ; Bowling Green Stat University 
6. 
Brady; 22 april 2009 BEMAS Studieavond 
7. 
Smart Staff International ABN 11 078 040 016; Isolation and Permit to Work 
8. 
Champs software Inc. Computerized Maintenance Management System and 
Lockout/tagout Automating the system 
9. 
European Power-Semiconductor and Electronics Company; Using integrated NTC with 
reliable isolation 
10. Electrical Safety Guideline; University of Northern Colorado June 2010 
11. Different isolation procedures of AM site; Cadenassage AM Montréal; Dofasco, 
Asturias, Newcastle, Lazaro Cardenas, Ostrava, Vanderbijltpark, Zaragosa,…. 
12. Procedures for the isolation of machinery; Monash Iniversity may 2009 
13. HSE Books; The safe isolation of plant and equipment 2006 
14. HSE Books; Guidance on permit-to-work systems 2005  
15. Maine Municipal Association Risk Management Services; Best Practices Guide for 
Lockout Programs 3/28/2005 
16. Maine Gov. Control of Hazardous Energy (lockout/tagout) 29 CFR 1910.47 
17. EHS University of California, Irvine; Hazardous Energies Control and LO/TO Program 
18. Alternative Lockout Tagout ANSI Z244.1-2003 
19. Guidance Note Lockout and Tagging of plant;www.Worksafe.Victoria.gov.06/06/2005 
20. East Caroline University; Control  of Hazardous energy(LOTO) Training program 
21. DHHS Policies and Procedures Lockout/Tagout 5/1/2009 
22. www.enr.state.nc.us/SP2003/chapter7SP; Safety Policy LOTO 
23. Torus Risk Engineering; Best Practice Centre; Positive isolation 2010 
24. Pilz Safe Automation; Emergency Stops – make sure yours comply 
25. Master Lock; Leaflet Worldwide 2011