 
1
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Scope:  
 
Execution of works at heights by means of portable ladders is inherently hazardous and can jeopardize 
their users. Inappropriate use is a major source of injuries or even fatalities among own and contractor 
workers, and many of the injuries are serious enough to require time off the job.  
This document applies to all portable ladders used by ArcelorMittal employees or contractors in 
industrial areas, constructions or demolitions, repairs and maintenances, painting of worksites etc 
where the working at height activities requires to climbing in elevated positions. 
 
2. Definitions:  
 
- 
Portable ladders – A tool temporarily used in order to transpose people between floors with level 
difference or to achieve an elevated position of the user. 
- 
Work of short-term and of minor extent - following activities as 
example: 
 
 Service and inspection, 
 Measuring and calibration 
 Changing of lights  
 Attaching / detaching of slings 
 Setting anchor screws 
 
3. General principle 
 
To achieve an elevated work position, use of portable ladders has to be 
strictly limited to circumstances where the application of other more safe equipments is not appropriate 
due to minor risks, a short term work of minor extent or due to locally narrowed conditions. 
Prior starting a short-term and minor extent on a portable ladder a risk assessment must always be 
performed. The risk assessment has to consider, besides the duration and severity of the work, the 
physical load as well as the tools and materials to be carried. This risk assessment is mandatory in order 
to check whether other alternative tools (e.g. scaffolds, mobile platforms) in stead of a ladder are 
available and more appropriate to carry out the task safely, and to determine countermeasures on risk 
elimination when using a portable ladder 
 
 
Health & Safety 
OPERATION 
STANDARD 
Ref.:  
AM Safety ST 003  
 
A1 Portable  ladders 
Issued:  07.05.2012 
Vers.:  
1 
Rev.:  
07.05.2012 
Use of portable ladders  
Controlled Circulation  
Elaborated by:  
Checked by:  
Approved by:  
Name :  
Sylvio de Menezes Filho 
Wolfram Weiss 
Lisa Williamson 
HSLT 
 
Frank Haers
 
2
 
 
4. Safety Rules for all Portable Ladders 
 
If the risk assessment concludes that the use of a ladder is the most appropriate tool, the following 
rules must be applied for all portable ladders: 
 
Preparation: 
 
 The portable ladder has to be checked before use on their orderly 
condition. Any failure has to be reported, defective portable ladders 
have to be replaced immediately, i.e. not to be used at all and to be 
disposed of. 
 The portable ladder has to be kept free of oil, grease and other 
slipping hazards.  
 
Positioning: 
 
 The portable ladder has to be put only on stable and level surfaces 
and to be secured, preferably at the top, or be held by someone to 
avoid the portable ladder from slipping or falling over. 
 Keep areas clear around the top and bottom of the portable ladder 
 When the portable ladder is used for access to an upper landing surface, the side 
rails must extend at least 1 m (3 feet) above the upper landing surface. 
 A portable ladder can not be used to bridge a height difference of > 5 meters (17 
feet) unless risk assessment supports such special use. 
 The portable ladder has to be docked in an angle of 65° to 75°. This means that 
the base should be set out one-fourth of the ladder's height to its top support point (with the elbow 
method the correct angle can be identified).  
 Portable ladders which are placed in areas such as passageways, 
doorways or driveways, or where they can be hit by workplace 
activities or traffic, have to be properly secured and the area 
must be marked to prevent accidental movement.  In any case 
barricades have to be placed immediately adjacent to keep 
traffic or activity away from the portable ladder; for urgent 
situations a safety person supervising the area as his sole task, 
can be considered as an alternative. 
 
Usage: 
 
 Use portable ladders only for their designed purpose 
 Make sure the ladder has the proper duty rating to carry your weight 
and the material you are going to use on it.  
 When working above 1.8 m (6 feet), the portable ladder user has to 
wear fall protection with a suitable tie off point, except shot-term work of minor 
extent (see Annex 1: ladder use flow chart) on portable ladders. When executing work 
of minor extent without fall protection, choose wherever possible as alternative 
platform ladders (see example in pictures below) with side protection which are more 
convenient and appropriate to do the work safely). 
< 5 m
 
3
 
 
 Face the portable ladder when moving up or down. 
 Do not use a portable ladder by 2 or more persons at the same time 
unless designed for more than one person. 
 Use at least one hand to grasp the portable ladder (assure 3 points 
contact) when moving up or down. 
 Do not move, shift or extend portable ladders while in use. 
 Do not lean out while standing on the portable ladder  
 Do not use the 3 last steps (topside) due to missing possibility to hold tight and the risk of ladder 
slippage 
 Use portable ladders equipped with nonconductive side rails if the worker or the ladder could 
contact exposed energized electrical equipment.  Even aluminum and wet or dirty wood of 
fiberglass ladders can conduct electricity so keep all ladders and tools at least 10 feet / 3 m away 
from live overhead power lines and other overhead obstructions. 
 
 
 
 
Special rules on portable step ladders/ladder stand: 
 
 Step portable ladders must be positioned with 
tensioned safety struts.   
 Step portable ladders without support bar can only 
be acceded till the 4rdhighest step (the 3 upper 
steps enable to lean on), unless designed for that 
purpose. 
 Step portable ladders are not to be used as leaning portable ladders  
 
Restrictions: 
 
 Don’t use homemade portable ladders (this includes portable ladders built at the jobsite by 
contractors or own personnel)  
 Don’t repair of portable ladders (except changing feet and then it has to be inspected before being 
used again) 
 Don’t modify or improvise portable ladders
 
4
 
 Don’t extend portable ladders by tiding or fastening two or more 
portable ladders together to create longer sections. 
 Don’t use portable ladders as part of a platform construction. 
 
 
5. Inventory & regular inspections: 
 
 
An inventory and identification of all portable ladders in use must be carried out including the 
determination of the ladder owner as well as the inspection status; all portable ladders must be labeled 
accordingly so that the user can detect or find out the ladder is checked and OK for use. 
A competent person must inspect portable ladders for visible defects annually and after any incident 
that could affect their safe use. Anyhow there must be a pre-use inspection of each portable ladder 
before every single use. 
Portable ladders with structural defects, such as broken or missing rungs, cleats or steps, broken or split 
rails, corroded components or other faulty or defective components—must be removed from the 
workplace immediately and must be destroyed before disposal. 
All contractors need to maintain and provide as evidence their inventory list, inspection list and all 
documents related to their portable ladders and they must keep the documentation available so it can 
be checked. 
Inspection check lists or specific documents need to be recorded and kept at minimum over 2 inspection 
periods.  Required Checklist for Inspection – see Annex 2. 
 
6. Training Requirements 
 
 
Own employees as well as employees from service providers regularly involved in working at height jobs 
have to be trained on the hazards/risks related to work on portable ladders and the appropriate use. 
Regular retraining must be considered.
 
5
 
Task requires you to use a ladder
Choose the proper type of ladder 
for the task (straight or step)
• Use alternate way of doing job
• Use elevated work platform
• Use scaffolding 
• Install permanent platform
• Use Rolling Ladder
Is the work:
- *short term of minor 
extent?
- you can perform it facing 
the ladder, remain centered 
and leaning into the ladder?
Complete the work following safe 
ladder practices (i.e. **secure, 
level ground, non slip feet, stay 
between the side rails etc.)  
**Secure = tie off, someone 
holding, cleats, mud sill etc.
Yes
Yes
No
No
Annex 1
Safe Ladder Use Planning
Can you wear fall 
protection equipment and 
attach to an appropriate 
anchor point?
*Short-term work of minor 
extent:
- Service and inspection
- Measuring/calibration
- Changing of lights 
-Attaching/detaching of slings
- Setting anchor screws
 
6
 
Annex 2 - Checklist for inspection 
 
Criteria 
1st inspection 
2nd inspection 
3rd inspection 
Side rails: 
 Deformation 
 Damages (e.g. cracks) 
 Wearing 
 Sharp edges, splitter 
 
 
 
Steps: 
 Deformation 
 Damages  
 Wearing tread 
 Sharp edges, splitter 
 Connection to side rails 
 
 
 
Safety struts (step portable 
ladders): 
 Completeness / fixation 
 Functioning 
 Damages 
 
 
 
Fitting parts: 
 Completeness / fixation 
 Damages / corrosion 
 Functioning 
 Wearing 
 Lubrication (mech. parts) 
 
 
 
Accessories: 
 Completeness / fixation 
 No conductivity of side rails  
 
 
 
Indication: 
 Label 
 
 
 
Inspection result: 
 Ladder OK for use 
 Repair necessary 
 Remove immediately 
 
 
 
Next inspection (Month/year) 
 
 
 
Inspection done by (date signature)