Document information
Short description:
Instructions for electrical work.
Scope:
This Standard applies to all electrical systems and devices used by ArcelorMittal, or contractors. It
defines minimum mandatory requirements, intending to prevent fatality or injury. 
Business Owners:
Writer (prepared by):
Baluch Eduard
Lunardi Diego
Creation date:
Review date:
Implementation Date:
13/07/2023
29/08/2023
01/08/2023
Reference Documents
Reference or date
Title
Validation
Validated by
Position
Validation date
PAULMIER ROBIN
Group Health & Safety
23/08/2023
Approval
Approved by
Position
Approval date
DAVEY BRADLEY
Head of Corporate Business Optimization
25/08/2023
AM_H&S_PR_021_01
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Health & Safety
ArcelorMittal
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 1 of 16
1.
Scope 
Compliance with local legislation is mandatory. In case this standard and the local legislation differ 
but are compatible, the strictest prevails. In case of conflict between this standard and the local 
legislation, the local prevails. Similar national standards are accepted  as long as equivalent Ex: 
NEMA in North America equivalent with IP code (IEC 60529).
This Standard applies to all electrical systems and devices used by ArcelorMittal, or contractors. It 
defines minimum mandatory requirements, intending to prevent fatality or injury due to:

Arc flash exposure,

Electric shock, either by direct contact with energized electrical conductors, or by indirect 
contact due to normally earthed conductive parts becoming live under fault conditions.
Practical examples: 

The change of a motor, requiring manipulating, at one point in time, bare conductors, 
previously de-energized, falls in the scope of this FPS. 

Changing the coupling of that same motor ( e.g. with a roll or a pump), which also requires 
the de-energization of the motor but do not require to touch at any time a bare conductor, is 
not concerned by this FPS. 

The cleaning activity of some electric transformer, previously de-energized, falls in the scope 
of this FPS. 

Any work that occurs inside an electric room or yard, or that implies the opening of an 
electric cabinet, or that implies working close to bare conductors that can be accessed, even 
if previously de-energized, falls in the scope of this FPS.
it covers: 

All interventions on electrical equipment / systems with voltage above 50 V AC (alternating 
current) or 120 V DC (Direct Current). 

Usage of electrical portable equipment.
2.
Definitions 
Approach Boundaries - It is an approach distance to exposed, energized electrical components 
within which a shock or arc flash hazard exists. 
Shock protection boundaries are based on voltage level and whether the exposed energized 
components are fixed or movable. NFPA 70E Table 130.2(C) defines these boundary distances for 
nominal phase-to-phase system voltages from 50 Volts to 800kV (other national or international 
norms are acceptable). 
Limited Approach Boundary: to enter this boundary, unqualified persons must be accompanied by a 
qualified person and use required PPEs.
Restricted Approach Boundary: only qualified persons are allowed, and they must use PPEs.
Arc Flash Boundary:  is a distance from a potential arc source within which a person could receive a 
second degree burn if an electrical arc flash were to occur. It must be calculated or given by the 
equipment supplier.
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 2 of 16
Figure 01 - Example of Identification Signaling with the indication of safety distance.
Arc Blast - A release of mechanical, acoustical, thermal, and optical energy from an electric arc
Arc Flash Hazard - Arc flash is defined as an electric arc event where current flows through the air 
and thermal energy is dissipated as radiant, convective, and conductive heat.
Authorized Person - A person approved or assigned by the employer to perform a specific type of 
duty or duties or to be at a specific location at the jobsite.
De-energized electrical work - Electrical work that is performed on equipment that has been 
previously energized and is now free from any electrical connection.
Electrical Work - A ny task that involves a shock or arc flash hazard or that could create potential 
shock or arc flash hazards for future users.
Electric Portable Devices -  Cord-and-plug equipment to any electrical utilization equipment that 
uses a flexible cord and an attachment plug to connect to a source of hazardous energy.
Electrical equipment - Any electrical installation, apparatus, appliance, cable, conductor, fitting, 
insulator, material, meter, or wire that is used for controlling, generating, supplying, transforming, or 
transmitting electricity at a voltage greater than extra-low voltage, is operated by electricity at a 
voltage greater than extra-low voltage. 
Energized - connected to a source of electrical supply or subject to hazardous induced or 
capacitive voltages.
Energized Electrical Work - Repair, maintenance, troubleshooting, or testing on electrical circuits, 
components, or systems while energized/live.
Exposed Electrical Parts - Energized parts that can be inadvertently touched or approached 
nearer than a safe distance by a person. Parts not suitably guarded, isolated, or insulated. ( i.e. 
terminal contacts/lugs, bare wiring, etc.).
Extra Low Voltage -  an operating voltage not exceeding 50 Volt alternating current (AC) or 120 Volt 
ripple free direct current (DC)
Grounding - Grounding a tool or electrical system means intentionally creating a low-resistance 
path that connects to the earth. This prevents the buildup of voltages that could cause and electrical 
accident. 
Guarding  - Guarding involves locating or enclosing electric equipment to make sure people don’t 
accidentally come into contact with its live parts. 
High voltage - A voltage source more than 1000V.
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 3 of 16
Isolated - disconnected from all sources of electricity supply and rendered incapable of being made 
energized without premeditated and deliberate action. 
Low voltage  - Means voltage that exceeds extra-low voltage and does not exceed 1000 volts 
alternating current (1000 V AC) or 1500 volts direct current (1500 V DC). 
Qualified person (NFPA70E definition) - who has demonstrated skills and knowledge related to the 
construction and operation of electrical equipment and installations and has received safety training 
to identify the hazards and reduce the associated risk. A qualified person is formally recognized by 
the employer. Refer to your local legislation for additional requirements.
Residual current device (RCD), (called Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter (GFCI) in North 
America)  - A device intended to isolate supply to protected circuits, socket outlets or electrical 
equipment in the event of a current flow to earth that exceeds a predetermined value. The RCD / 
GFCI device may be fixed or portable.
Shock Hazard  -  A dangerous condition associated with the release of energy caused by contact or 
approach to liver parts. 
Other definitions can be found in NFPA 70E (Standard for Electrical Safety in the Workplace) or IEC 
(International Electrotechnical Commission).
3.
Electrical Equipment Circuit Design
There must be a process for ensuring that new or modified equipment and infrastructure considers 
methods to minimize the electrical hazards of arc flash and electrical shock. 
New or upgraded electrical rooms, substations, cabinets, and panels must use equipment with a 
protection rating of minimum IP2X or IPXXB (low voltage) or IP3X or IPXXC (high voltage) against 
access to hazardous parts with the finger or tools (see the Appendix 3).
There must be an arc flash and shock protection plan (procedure or standard) to determine and 
reduce incident energies and to define the appropriate PPEs and associated procedures to mitigate 
the hazard during operation, inspection and maintenance.
Isolation strategies (isolation points, …) must be defined during the specification of the equipment.
Overload protection must be installed on all final distribution circuits. The protection settings must 
be established by qualified personnel.
Earth leakage protection must be installed on all final sub-circuits supplying socket outlets. The 
protection settings must be established by qualified personnel.
4.
Work Order, HIRA-lite and Work Permit
Any electrical work requires a work order, a HIRA-lite and a formal work permit. 
Any non- electrical work on or near electrical equipment (e.g., cleaning, painting, mechanical 
activities … done inside an electrical room, or inside a de-energized electrical cabinet or in  close 
proximity with an open de-energized cabinet) requires  a work order and either a SOP (detailing 
safety controls) or a HIRA-lite.
The  work order must describe unambiguously the work(s) to be done (nature, extent) and the 
pieces of equipment concerned, which must be clearly and unambiguously identified, both on 
documents and on site (presence of identification label on the shop floor).
Elaboration of the  HIRA-lite must involve the active participation of a Qualified Person, and shall 
include:
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 4 of 16

The identification of all devices that would potentially remain energized around the work 
area, and corresponding control measures ( always prefer de-energization of all devices 
around the work area whenever possible).

The competences and trainings required for people to carry out the work.

The mandatory requirement for a  last-minute absence of voltage test before 
approaching/touching anything that is supposed to be de-energized (to be done 
assuming voltage is present, so using appropriate PPEs). These tests are  additional to the 
test(s) already performed during the LOTOTO process. 

Delivering the work permit shall require the presence of the work order, the corresponding 
HIRA-lite, checked for consistency by an ArcelorMittal qualified person, and signed  of by all 
people who will perform the work, the evidence of completion of all isolations (LOTOTOs) 
foreseen in the HIRA-lite and a written work procedure (describing how to perform the tasks).  
5.
High Voltage hazard requests working in pairs 
When high-voltage electrical hazard exists, working alone is prohibited. In this case, activities must 
be carried out in pairs. The second person should always minimize his/her exposure to the electrical 
hazard, to be able to rescue the first one at any time, using engineered insulated hook during each 
hazardous phase of the works. 
6.
Personal Protective Equipment - PPEs 
Must be defined in the HIRA-lite and compatible with the shock hazard and arc flash hazard levels 
of the work to be performed (notice: insulating gloves are usually not arc flash rated and must be 
covered by arc-flash rated leather gloves).  In order to minimize clothing changes,  i t is 
recommended that the people exposed to electrical risks are provided by default with PPEs which 
are arc rated at least class 2 in NFPA70E (min 8  cal /cm2). Some comfortable PPEs exist up to 11  
cal/cm2 in some regions (e.g., Brazil).
One complete set of Arc Flash rated PPEs, corresponding to the highest incident energy level 
present in the place, must be available in each substation / electric room (2 sets in case of 
presence of high voltage).  In order to ease the inventories and logistics management, as well as to 
minimize risks of confusions, we also recommend that these PPEs sets should be at least min 40  
cal/cm2, or higher whenever needed.
An insulated rescue hook must be present in each substation / electric room. 
Underwear made from synthetic materials (Nylon, Polyester, …) are prohibited within Arc Flash 
boundary (risk of melting on people’s skin in case of Arc Flash). 
Conductive waistbands, rings, bracelets, keys, metal frame glasses are prohibited within restricted 
approach boundary.
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 5 of 16
Figure 02 - Example of Arc Flash rated categories - Refer to your local legislation.
7.
Inspections and tests 
PPEs (including the sets kept in each substation / electrical room mentioned in chapter 6), collective 
protections, and tools must be inspected and tested periodically in compliance with manufacturers' 
recommendations and local legislation. Examples: rubber gloves, insulating blankets, rubber mats, 
temporary grounding, etc. 
Measuring instruments must be inspected, calibrated, and tested in compliance with manufacturers' 
recommendations and local legislation. 
Electrical equipment, grounding continuity and electrical safety devices must be inspected and/or 
tested upon installation, repair, or modification and thereafter on a defined schedule.
Inspections and tests results must be duly recorded.
There must be a process for removing equipment unfit or unsafe for purpose.
8.
Absence of voltage test 
As long as the absence of voltage test has not been performed, the equipment must be considered 
as live.
Absence of voltage test must be performed with appropriate designed for purpose PPEs and tool. 
For high voltage, a set of tools must be kept in each electrical room.
Last minute absence of voltage test, before touching or approaching anything that is supposed to 
be de-energized, is mandatory, independently, and additionally of the absence of voltage test 
performed during the LOTOTO process. This last minute absence of voltage test shall be done by 
the person(s) going to perform the work, or by another person but  at the express condition that the 
person(s) going to perform the work see(s) the test live, and understand(s) the result, in particular 
understands what conductor is tested and why it guarantees that the pieces of equipment s/he is 
going to touch or might accidentally touch are de-energized. This last-minute test shall be repeated 
at the beginning of each shift and each time there is a change in the person(s) performing the work. 
There must be an appropriate absence of voltage tester, kept operational and in good order at any 
time, in each substation / electrical room with presence of high voltage.
9.
Competency
All personnel performing non- electrical work on or near electrical equipment ( e.g. cleaning, painting, 
mechanical activities … done inside an electrical room, or inside a de-energized electrical cabinet 
or in close proximity with an open de-energized cabinet) must receive electrical hazard training
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 6 of 16
relevant to their risks exposure, at the commencement of employment and at intervals not 
exceeding three years, always based on updated standards and procedures. Additionally, 
complementary training is recommended to maintain an appropriate level of awareness taking into 
account the following: a) the worker is not complying with safety-related work practices, b) in case 
of new technology, c) new types of equipment, d) when the worker needs to  perform  tasks that are 
performed less often than once per year; e) the worker needs to  perform safety-related work 
practices that are not normally used during his/her regular job duties; or, e) when the worker's job 
duties change.
Personnel performing electrical work must be qualified (see definitions).
Contractors must be able to prove the qualification of their employees at the request of ArcelorMittal, 
who shall regularly check for it through audits or during meetings.
10. Electrical Documentation
There must be a process for maintaining up-to-date documentation for:

Single line diagrams,

System fault levels,

Arc flash incident energy levels,

Equipment details
11. LOTOTO to minimize work on live equipment - See also FPS 001 – Isolation
LOTOTO operations shall be done according to an isolation written instruction (IWI). Any IWI, 
permanent or temporary, including 1 shot ones, must be developed (discussed and validated) by at 
least 2 qualified persons, of which the designated area expert. 
LOTOTO process for electrical isolation must include the following 5 steps:
1.
Disconnection (physical separation of the conductors)
2.
Locking out the separation device(s) to physically prevent accidental re-connection, and 
tagging out the separation device(s)
3.
Physical identification of the piece of equipment isolated (on the shop floor, at the place 
where work is  actually going to be done, this is different from the tagging of the locked 
separation device, which is usually located in an electric room or cabinet, far away from the 
working place). For big maintenance shutdowns, with works on many different pieces of 
equipment, using the same isolation point, this requirement is optional (if allowed by local 
legislation)
4.
Absence of voltage test (equivalent to “Try-Out”, last TO of the LO-TO-TO).
5.
Grounding: mandatory for high voltage systems, or when a risk of re-energization exists 
(presence of capacitors, induction risks …), Each conductor has to be grounded.
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 7 of 16
When the disconnecting point is located outside of ArcelorMittal site ( e.g. at a the power supplier 
location), we still need to lock out and tag out, by going physically to the place of disconnection to 
put  our own ArcelorMittal lock on the disconnecting device or on a lockbox. When it is physically 
impossible, or when the supplier refuses to put our lock on their isolating device or on their lockbox, 
another contractual solution must be negotiated. This solution must contractually guarantee that the 
supplier won’t re-energize the conductors without our dated written authorization, signed by a 
predefined ArcelorMittal employee.
12. Access & guarding
Equipment which is not IP2X/IPXXB (low voltage), or IP3X/IPXXC (high voltage), must be guarded 
against accidental contact by being installed in engineered enclosures such as locked cabinets or 
locked rooms, requesting keys or tools to be opened. 
Switchyards, substations / electric rooms must be locked with the access controlled. 
Measures for access and accidental contact with live parts must be foreseen. Ex: Materials or tools 
fall, accidental movements during activity or cleaning, tools not suitable for the activity, closing of 
panel doors, etc.
There must be a process to protect from damage and mitigate the hazards associated with 
approaching and working near overhead power lines, buried, concealed, surface mounted and 
trailing cables
Figure 04 - Examples of Polycarbonate to Cover Electrical parts
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 8 of 16
Figure 05 - Examples of Insulated material to cover electrical parts
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 9 of 16
Figure 06 - Examples of Clamps and Insulated Sheets
Figure 07 - Examples of Signaling boards
Figure 08 - Examples of physical barrier protection
  
13. Safety Distance and Approach Boundaries
Arc Flash Boundary, Limited Approach Boundary, Restricted Approach Boundary, must be clearly 
displayed locally on the equipment or near to the equipment.
People working in electrical rooms must be trained about Approach Boundaries. 
When a cabinet is open, physical temporary barriers must be put at the furthest approach boundary 
(which is usually the Arc Flash Boundary).
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 10 of 16
Figure 09 - Examples of temporary barrier around open cabinet.
 
14. Signaling and Labeling of Electrical Equipment and Circuits
Minimum Labeling Requirements for Electrical cabinets, Service Panels and Electric Rooms Doors:
a) Cabinet/Panel/Room identification
b) Warning sign: Electric shock hazard and Arc Flash hazard, PPEs required
c) Must have the Voltage or Voltages. (Example 4160V, 480V, 240V, 120V.ect.)
d) Equipment must be marked with the following:

Available incident energy at working distance (usually 450 mm) and/or Minimum arc 
rating of PPEs to be used

 Arc Flash Boundary distance
Figure 10 - Example of Identification Signaling for electrical rooms or cabinets panels.
 
15. Requirements for work in energized systems or in proximity to energized systems
There must be a process to minimize work on live/energized equipment or in proximity with such 
equipment.  Working on isolated equipment is the norm. Working on live/energized equipment 
or in proximity with such equipment must remain the exception , it can only be accepted when 
isolation is not feasible ( e.g. fault finding …) or would generate greater risks (must be attested by a 
written preliminary study).
It must be clearly mentioned and authorized in the work permit.
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 11 of 16
Appropriate voltage rated and arc-flash rated PPEs (gloves, garments, face shield, carpets, 
shoes…), and insulated hand tools must be used.
The risk of arc flash must be controlled.
Collective protection measures must be installed (physical barriers preventing other people to enter 
the dangerous area.)
Where there is a potential to make inadvertent contact with energized parts, engineered electrical 
covers/blankets must be installed to separate people from bare conductors, and prevent accident in 
case of tool dropped.
16. Residual Current Device - RCD & Ground Fault Circuit Interrupters - GFCI 
The use of these devices is mandatory on all sockets located outdoor or in wet/humid environment. 
It must be selected by a Qualified professional. Inspections and Periodic Tests must be planned and 
executed to guarantee the proper functioning of the systems. 
Figure 11 - Examples of RCDs / GFCIs devices
17. Safety Portable Electric Devices
Usage of electric portable tools is usually not concerned by chapters 3 to 15 included. 
The following requirements apply to the use of cord-and-plug-connected equipment and flexible 
cord sets (extension cords): 
a) Extension cords may only be used to provide temporary power. 
b) Home-made extension cords  is only authorized by qualified person and should be IP67 (IEC 
60529).
c)
Portable cord-and-plug connected equipment and extension cords must be visually inspected 
before each use for external defects such as loose parts, deformed and missing pins, or 
damage to outer jacket or insulation, and for possible internal damage such as pinched or 
crushed.
d) Any defective equipment must be removed from service. 
e) Flexible cords and cables must be protected from accidental damage, especially when they 
pass through doorways or other pinch points.
f)
Flexible cords and cables must be covered by a cord protector or tape when they extend into a 
walkway to avoid creating a trip hazard. 
g) The repair of damaged electric cords and cables must use specific professional materials 
(electric tape, electric sleeve, thermo-retractable electric sleeve, …), designed and 
manufactured for that purpose and carried out by a qualified person.
h) Wet or damp Conditions:
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 12 of 16

Work in dry areas without the presence of water or water puddle should be prioritized.

Connect only to electrical circuits protected through RCD/GFCIs.

Do not use electrical extension cords in wet or damp locations, unless it is waterproof, 
including connector, plugs (IPX7 or better).

Portable lighting used in wet or conductive locations, such as tanks or boilers, must be 
operated at no more than 12 volts or must be protected by RCD/GFCI’s. 

Ensure that workers use dry and isolated shoes and gloves.
i)
All electric portable equipment, including lamps, must be rated against IEC/EN 61140, with a 
visible mark/logo:

Class 0 - Is forbidden.

Class I - Devices (where user protection from electric shock is achieved through a 
combination of insulation and a protective earthing/ground) can be used only if  a 
RCD/GFCI is present on the power supply.

Class II - where user protection from electric shock is achieved through two levels of 
insulation, without the need for earthing, are allowed.

Class III - where the input is extra-low voltage (≤ 50 V AC) are allowed.
Figure 11 - Example of Identification Signaling for electrical portable devices
Figure 12 - Examples of GFCI devices, mandatory on the power supply to devices Class I:
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 13 of 16
Figure 13 - Example of IP67 or IP 68 sleeves for reparation of electric cords and cables:
18. Hand tools
Appropriate hand tools must be used.  In particular, it is forbidden to use knives for wire 
stripping/peeling off. Professional electric wire strippers must be used.
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 14 of 16
Appendix 1 - Hierarchy of Electric Risk Control
There is within NFPA 70E the concept of Hierarchy of Controls to reduce the risk of arc flash and 
electric shock when working on energized equipment. This hierarchy must be strictly applied and 
considered in ArcelorMittal new projects, maintenance, and ALL operations involving electricity: 
1.
The first technique is to eliminate hazard by simply  not working on energized equipment . If 
equipment is de-energized, it is not possible to trigger an arc flash or electric shock event.
2.
The second concept,  Reducing/ S ubstituting Risk by Design , then takes priority. This concept 
aims to design equipment in such a way that inspection tasks can be performed while keeping 
the equipment in a “closed and guarded” condition. At this point, virtually every Original 
Equipment Manufacturers has designs for their electrical equipment that includes the optional 
addition of Infrared Windows, Ultrasound Ports, touch-proof voltage measurement ports and 
other electrical maintenance safety devices. Arc Resistant Switchgear designs and Arc 
Suppression systems also fall into this category. The selection of this type of equipment must be 
prioritized.
3.
If equipment has not been deployed using the Reducing/ S ubstituting Risk by Design concept 
allowing closed panel inspections, the third priority in the Hierarchy of Control is to apply  
Engineering Controls such Safeguards to isolate the hazards from the personnel with 
effective barriers and interlocks . This might include portable arc shields, insulating blankets, 
mechanical and electrical interlocks, voltage measurement equipment, physical barriers to 
prevent accidental touching of energized parts, electronic access Control to electrical rooms, 
insulating sticks, etc.
4.
Administrative Controls are the fourth priority in the Hierarchy of Control and include policies, 
procedures, work practices and training to help reduce the risk to personnel and to ensure that 
only qualified personnel undertake tasks. 
5.
Finally, the use of  proper Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) is the option of last resort in 
the Hierarchy. PPE, with the appropriate ratings for isolation and for potential Arc Flash incident 
energy, should be worn for operations on energized equipment,  in  addition to other controls 
upper in the Hierarchy: they should never be used as a unique control.
The top 3 controls categories are designed to control the risk before it gets near the employee. The 
last 2 categories assume that the employee is exposed to the electrical energy.
Figure 14 - Hierarchy of Risk Controls.
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 15 of 16
Appendix 2 - Shock Protection Approach Boundaries to Exposed Energized Electrical 
Conductors or Circuit Parts (Example of NFPA recommendations.
Health & Safety
AM_H&S_PR_021
ArcelorMittal
AM Safety ST 023 v0 - Electrical safety
Page 16 of 16
Appendix 3:  IP code or ingress protection code
IP code indicates the device protection´s level against intrusion, dust, accidental contact, and water. 
It is defined by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) under the international standard 
IEC 60529. 
IP2X or IPXXB - Protection from the objects with diameter larger than 12 mm (ex. Contact with 
fingers, or objects with a length of max. 80mm).
Figure 15 – IP2X or IPXXB
IP3X or IPXXC  - Protection from the objects with a diameter larger than 2.5 mm (ex. Contact with 
wires larger/longer than 2.5mm).
Figure 16 – IP3X or IPXXC
---- End of Document ----